FIGURE 3.1 Farmer’s Market Organic vegetables and fruits that are grown and sold within a specific geographical
region should, in theory, cost less than conventional produce because the transportation costs are less. That is not,
however, usually the case. (Credit: modification of "Old Farmers' Market" by NatalieMaynor/Flickr, CC BY 2.0)
CHAPTER OBJECTIVES
In this chapter, you will learn about:
•
Demand, Supply, and Equilibrium in Markets for Goods and Services
•
Shifts in Demand and Supply for Goods and Services
•
Changes in Equilibrium Price and Quantity: The Four-Step Process
•
Price Ceilings and Price Floors
Introduction to Demand and Supply
Why Can We Not Get Enough of Organic Foods?
Organic food is increasingly popular, not just in the United States, but worldwide. At one time, consumers had to go
to specialty stores or farmers' markets to find organic produce. Now it is available in most grocery stores. In short,
3
Demand and Supply
BRING IT HOME

organic has become part of the mainstream.
Ever wonder why organic food costs more than conventional food? Why, say, does an organic Fuji apple cost $2.75 a
pound, while its conventional counterpart costs $1.72 a pound? The same price relationship is true for just about
every organic product on the market. If many organic foods are locally grown, would they not take less time to get to
market and therefore be cheaper? What are the forces that keep those prices from coming down? Turns out those
forces have quite a bit to do with this chapter’s topic: demand and supply.
An auction bidder pays thousands of dollars for a dress Whitney Houston wore. A collector spends a small
fortune for a few drawings by John Lennon. People usually react to purchases like these in two ways: their jaw
drops because they think these are high prices to pay for such goods or they think these are rare, desirable
items and the amount paid seems right.
LINK IT UP
Visit this website (http://openstax.org/l/celebauction) to read a list of bizarre items that have been purchased
for their ties to celebrities. These examples represent an interesting facet of demand and supply.
When economists talk about prices, they are less interested in making judgments than in gaining a practical
understanding of what determines prices and why prices change. Consider a price most of us contend with
weekly: that of a gallon of gas. Why was the average price of gasoline in the United States $3.16 per gallon in
June of 2020? Why did the price for gasoline fall sharply to $2.42 per gallon by January of 2021? To explain
these price movements, economists focus on the determinants of what gasoline buyers are willing to pay and
what gasoline sellers are willing to accept.
As it turns out, the price of gasoline in June of any given year is nearly always higher than the price in January
of that same year. Over recent decades, gasoline prices in midsummer have averaged about 10 cents per gallon
more than their midwinter low. The likely reason is that people drive more in the summer, and are also willing
to pay more for gas, but that does not explain how steeply gas prices fell. Other factors were at work during
those 18 months, such as increases in supply and decreases in the demand for crude oil.
This chapter introduces the economic model of demand and supply—one of the most powerful models in all of
economics. The discussion here begins by examining how demand and supply determine the price and the
quantity sold in markets for goods and services, and how changes in demand and supply lead to changes in
prices and quantities.
3.1 Demand, Supply, and Equilibrium in Markets for Goods and Services
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
•
Explain demand, quantity demanded, and the law of demand
•
Explain supply, quantity supplied, and the law of supply
•
Identify a demand curve and a supply curve
•
Explain equilibrium, equilibrium price, and equilibrium quantity
First let’s first focus on what economists mean by demand, what they mean by supply, and then how demand
and supply interact in a market.
Demand for Goods and Services
Economists use the term demand to refer to the amount of some good or service consumers are willing and
able to purchase at each price. Demand is fundamentally based on needs and wants—if you have no need or
want for something, you won't buy it. While a consumer may be able to differentiate between a need and a
want, from an economist’s perspective they are the same thing. Demand is also based on ability to pay. If you
48
3 • Demand and Supply
Access for free at openstax.org

cannot pay for it, you have no effective demand. By this definition, a person who does not have a drivers
license has no effective demand for a car.
What a buyer pays for a unit of the specific good or service is called price. The total number of units that
consumers would purchase at that price is called the quantity demanded. A rise in price of a good or service
almost always decreases the quantity demanded of that good or service. Conversely, a fall in price will increase
the quantity demanded. When the price of a gallon of gasoline increases, for example, people look for ways to
reduce their consumption by combining several errands, commuting by carpool or mass transit, or taking
weekend or vacation trips closer to home. Economists call this inverse relationship between price and quantity
demanded the law of demand. The law of demand assumes that all other variables that affect demand (which
we explain in the next module) are held constant.
We can show an example from the market for gasoline in a table or a graph. Economist call a table that shows
the quantity demanded at each price, such as Table 3.1, a demand schedule. In this case we measure price in
dollars per gallon of gasoline. We measure the quantity demanded in millions of gallons over some time period
(for example, per day or per year) and over some geographic area (like a state or a country). A demand curve
shows the relationship between price and quantity demanded on a graph like Figure 3.2, with quantity on the
horizontal axis and the price per gallon on the vertical axis. (Note that this is an exception to the normal rule in
mathematics that the independent variable (x) goes on the horizontal axis and the dependent variable (y) goes
on the vertical axis. Economics is not math.)
Table 3.1 shows the demand schedule and the graph in Figure 3.2 shows the demand curve. These are two
ways to describe the same relationship between price and quantity demanded.
Price (per gallon)
Quantity Demanded (millions of gallons)
$1.00
800
$1.20
700
$1.40
600
$1.60
550
$1.80
500
$2.00
460
$2.20
420
TABLE 3.1 Price and Quantity Demanded of Gasoline
3.1 • Demand, Supply, and Equilibrium in Markets for Goods and Services
49

FIGURE 3.2 A Demand Curve for Gasoline The demand schedule shows that as price rises, quantity demanded
decreases, and vice versa. We graph these points, and the line connecting them is the demand curve (D). The
downward slope of the demand curve again illustrates the law of demand—the inverse relationship between prices
and quantity demanded.
Demand curves will appear somewhat different for each product. They may appear relatively steep or flat, or
they may be straight or curved. Nearly all demand curves share the fundamental similarity that they slope
down from left to right. Demand curves embody the law of demand: As the price increases, the quantity
demanded decreases, and conversely, as the price decreases, the quantity demanded increases.
Confused about these different types of demand? Read the next Clear It Up feature.
Is demand the same as quantity demanded?
In economic terminology, demand is not the same as quantity demanded. When economists talk about demand,
they mean the relationship between a range of prices and the quantities demanded at those prices, as illustrated by
a demand curve or a demand schedule. When economists talk about quantity demanded, they mean only a certain
point on the demand curve, or one quantity on the demand schedule. In short, demand refers to the curve and
quantity demanded refers to a (specific) point on the curve.
Supply of Goods and Services
When economists talk about supply, they mean the amount of some good or service a producer is willing to
supply at each price. Price is what the producer receives for selling one unit of a good or service. A rise in price
almost always leads to an increase in the quantity supplied of that good or service, while a fall in price will
decrease the quantity supplied. When the price of gasoline rises, for example, it encourages profit-seeking
firms to take several actions: expand exploration for oil reserves; drill for more oil; invest in more pipelines
and oil tankers to bring the oil to plants for refining into gasoline; build new oil refineries; purchase additional
pipelines and trucks to ship the gasoline to gas stations; and open more gas stations or keep existing gas
stations open longer hours. Economists call this positive relationship between price and quantity
supplied—that a higher price leads to a higher quantity supplied and a lower price leads to a lower quantity
supplied—the law of supply. The law of supply assumes that all other variables that affect supply (to be
explained in the next module) are held constant.
Still unsure about the different types of supply? See the following Clear It Up feature.
CLEAR IT UP
50
3 • Demand and Supply
Access for free at openstax.org

Is supply the same as quantity supplied?
In economic terminology, supply is not the same as quantity supplied. When economists refer to supply, they mean
the relationship between a range of prices and the quantities supplied at those prices, a relationship that we can
illustrate with a supply curve or a supply schedule. When economists refer to quantity supplied, they mean only a
certain point on the supply curve, or one quantity on the supply schedule. In short, supply refers to the curve and
quantity supplied refers to a (specific) point on the curve.
Figure 3.3 illustrates the law of supply, again using the market for gasoline as an example. Like demand, we
can illustrate supply using a table or a graph. A supply schedule is a table, like Table 3.2, that shows the
quantity supplied at a range of different prices. Again, we measure price in dollars per gallon of gasoline and
we measure quantity supplied in millions of gallons. A supply curve is a graphic illustration of the relationship
between price, shown on the vertical axis, and quantity, shown on the horizontal axis. The supply schedule and
the supply curve are just two different ways of showing the same information. Notice that the horizontal and
vertical axes on the graph for the supply curve are the same as for the demand curve.
FIGURE 3.3 A Supply Curve for Gasoline The supply schedule is the table that shows quantity supplied of gasoline
at each price. As price rises, quantity supplied also increases, and vice versa. The supply curve (S) is created by
graphing the points from the supply schedule and then connecting them. The upward slope of the supply curve
illustrates the law of supply—that a higher price leads to a higher quantity supplied, and vice versa.
Price (per gallon)
Quantity Supplied (millions of gallons)
$1.00
500
$1.20
550
$1.40
600
$1.60
640
$1.80
680
TABLE 3.2 Price and Supply of Gasoline
CLEAR IT UP
3.1 • Demand, Supply, and Equilibrium in Markets for Goods and Services
51

Price (per gallon)
Quantity Supplied (millions of gallons)
$2.00
700
$2.20
720
TABLE 3.2 Price and Supply of Gasoline
The shape of supply curves will vary somewhat according to the product: steeper, flatter, straighter, or curved.
Nearly all supply curves, however, share a basic similarity: they slope up from left to right and illustrate the law
of supply: as the price rises, say, from $1.00 per gallon to $2.20 per gallon, the quantity supplied increases
from 500 gallons to 720 gallons. Conversely, as the price falls, the quantity supplied decreases.
Equilibrium—Where Demand and Supply Intersect
Because the graphs for demand and supply curves both have price on the vertical axis and quantity on the
horizontal axis, the demand curve and supply curve for a particular good or service can appear on the same
graph. Together, demand and supply determine the price and the quantity that will be bought and sold in a
market.
Figure 3.4 illustrates the interaction of demand and supply in the market for gasoline. The demand curve (D) is
identical to Figure 3.2. The supply curve (S) is identical to Figure 3.3. Table 3.3 contains the same information
in tabular form.
FIGURE 3.4 Demand and Supply for Gasoline The demand curve (D) and the supply curve (S) intersect at the
equilibrium point E, with a price of $1.40 and a quantity of 600. The equilibrium price is the only price where
quantity demanded is equal to quantity supplied. At a price above equilibrium like $1.80, quantity supplied exceeds
the quantity demanded, so there is excess supply. At a price below equilibrium such as $1.20, quantity demanded
exceeds quantity supplied, so there is excess demand.
Price (per gallon)
Quantity demanded (millions of gallons)
Quantity supplied (millions of gallons)
$1.00
800
500
$1.20
700
550
$1.40
600
600
TABLE 3.3 Price, Quantity Demanded, and Quantity Supplied
52
3 • Demand and Supply
Access for free at openstax.org

Price (per gallon)
Quantity demanded (millions of gallons)
Quantity supplied (millions of gallons)
$1.60
550
640
$1.80
500
680
$2.00
460
700
$2.20
420
720
TABLE 3.3 Price, Quantity Demanded, and Quantity Supplied
Remember this: When two lines on a diagram cross, this intersection usually means something. The point
where the supply curve (S) and the demand curve (D) cross, designated by point E in Figure 3.4, is called the
equilibrium. The equilibrium price is the only price where the plans of consumers and the plans of producers
agree—that is, where the amount of the product consumers want to buy (quantity demanded) is equal to the
amount producers want to sell (quantity supplied). Economists call this common quantity the equilibrium
quantity. At any other price, the quantity demanded does not equal the quantity supplied, so the market is not
in equilibrium at that price.
In Figure 3.4, the equilibrium price is $1.40 per gallon of gasoline and the equilibrium quantity is 600 million
gallons. If you had only the demand and supply schedules, and not the graph, you could find the equilibrium by
looking for the price level on the tables where the quantity demanded and the quantity supplied are equal.
The word “equilibrium” means “balance.” If a market is at its equilibrium price and quantity, then it has no
reason to move away from that point. However, if a market is not at equilibrium, then economic pressures arise
to move the market toward the equilibrium price and the equilibrium quantity.
Imagine, for example, that the price of a gallon of gasoline was above the equilibrium price—that is, instead of
$1.40 per gallon, the price is $1.80 per gallon. The dashed horizontal line at the price of $1.80 in Figure 3.4
illustrates this above-equilibrium price. At this higher price, the quantity demanded drops from 600 to 500.
This decline in quantity reflects how consumers react to the higher price by finding ways to use less gasoline.
Moreover, at this higher price of $1.80, the quantity of gasoline supplied rises from 600 to 680, as the higher
price makes it more profitable for gasoline producers to expand their output. Now, consider how quantity
demanded and quantity supplied are related at this above-equilibrium price. Quantity demanded has fallen to
500 gallons, while quantity supplied has risen to 680 gallons. In fact, at any above-equilibrium price, the
quantity supplied exceeds the quantity demanded. We call this an excess supply or a surplus.
With a surplus, gasoline accumulates at gas stations, in tanker trucks, in pipelines, and at oil refineries. This
accumulation puts pressure on gasoline sellers. If a surplus remains unsold, those firms involved in making
and selling gasoline are not receiving enough cash to pay their workers and to cover their expenses. In this
situation, some producers and sellers will want to cut prices, because it is better to sell at a lower price than not
to sell at all. Once some sellers start cutting prices, others will follow to avoid losing sales. These price
reductions in turn will stimulate a higher quantity demanded. Therefore, if the price is above the equilibrium
level, incentives built into the structure of demand and supply will create pressures for the price to fall toward
the equilibrium.
Now suppose that the price is below its equilibrium level at $1.20 per gallon, as the dashed horizontal line at
this price in Figure 3.4 shows. At this lower price, the quantity demanded increases from 600 to 700 as drivers
take longer trips, spend more minutes warming up the car in the driveway in wintertime, stop sharing rides to
work, and buy larger cars that get fewer miles to the gallon. However, the below-equilibrium price reduces
gasoline producers’ incentives to produce and sell gasoline, and the quantity supplied falls from 600 to 550.
3.1 • Demand, Supply, and Equilibrium in Markets for Goods and Services
53

When the price is below equilibrium, there is excess demand, or a shortage—that is, at the given price the
quantity demanded, which has been stimulated by the lower price, now exceeds the quantity supplied, which
has been depressed by the lower price. In this situation, eager gasoline buyers mob the gas stations, only to
find many stations running short of fuel. Oil companies and gas stations recognize that they have an
opportunity to make higher profits by selling what gasoline they have at a higher price. As a result, the price
rises toward the equilibrium level. Read Demand, Supply, and Efficiency for more discussion on the
importance of the demand and supply model.
3.2 Shifts in Demand and Supply for Goods and Services
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
•
Identify factors that affect demand
•
Graph demand curves and demand shifts
•
Identify factors that affect supply
•
Graph supply curves and supply shifts
The previous module explored how price affects the quantity demanded and the quantity supplied. The result
was the demand curve and the supply curve. Price, however, is not the only factor that influences buyers’ and
sellers’ decisions. For example, how is demand for vegetarian food affected if, say, health concerns cause more
consumers to avoid eating meat? How is the supply of diamonds affected if diamond producers discover
several new diamond mines? What are the major factors, in addition to the price, that influence demand or
supply?
LINK IT UP
Visit this website (https://openstax.org/l/toothfish) to read a brief note on how marketing strategies can
influence supply and demand of products.
What Factors Affect Demand?
We defined demand as the amount of some product a consumer is willing and able to purchase at each price.
That suggests at least two factors that affect demand. Willingness to purchase suggests a desire, based on what
economists call tastes and preferences. If you neither need nor want something, you will not buy it, and if you
really like something, you will buy more of it than someone who does not share your strong preference for it.
Ability to purchase suggests that income is important. Professors are usually able to afford better housing and
transportation than students, because they have more income. Prices of related goods can affect demand also.
If you need a new car, the price of a Honda may affect your demand for a Ford. Finally, the size or composition
of the population can affect demand. The more children a family has, the greater their demand for clothing.
The more driving-age children a family has, the greater their demand for car insurance, and the less for
diapers and baby formula.
These factors matter for both individual and market demand as a whole. Exactly how do these various factors
affect demand, and how do we show the effects graphically? To answer those questions, we need the ceteris
paribus assumption.
The Ceteris Paribus Assumption
A demand curve or a supply curve is a relationship between two, and only two, variables: quantity on the
horizontal axis and price on the vertical axis. The assumption behind a demand curve or a supply curve is that
no relevant economic factors, other than the product’s price, are changing. Economists call this assumption
ceteris paribus, a Latin phrase meaning “other things being equal.” Any given demand or supply curve is
based on the ceteris paribus assumption that all else is held equal. A demand curve or a supply curve is a
relationship between two, and only two, variables when all other variables are kept constant. If all else is not
54
3 • Demand and Supply
Access for free at openstax.org

held equal, then the laws of supply and demand will not necessarily hold, as the following Clear It Up feature
shows.
When does ceteris paribus apply?
We typically apply ceteris paribus when we observe how changes in price affect demand or supply, but we can apply
ceteris paribus more generally. In the real world, demand and supply depend on more factors than just price. For
example, a consumer’s demand depends on income and a producer’s supply depends on the cost of producing the
product. How can we analyze the effect on demand or supply if multiple factors are changing at the same time—say
price rises and income falls? The answer is that we examine the changes one at a time, assuming the other factors
are held constant.
For example, we can say that an increase in the price reduces the amount consumers will buy (assuming income,
and anything else that affects demand, is unchanged). Additionally, a decrease in income reduces the amount
consumers can afford to buy (assuming price, and anything else that affects demand, is unchanged). This is what the
ceteris paribus assumption really means. In this particular case, after we analyze each factor separately, we can
combine the results. The amount consumers buy falls for two reasons: first because of the higher price and second
because of the lower income.
How Does Income Affect Demand?
Let’s use income as an example of how factors other than price affect demand. Figure 3.5 shows the initial
demand for automobiles as D0. At point Q, for example, if the price is $20,000 per car, the quantity of cars
demanded is 18 million. D0 also shows how the quantity of cars demanded would change as a result of a higher
or lower price. For example, if the price of a car rose to $22,000, the quantity demanded would decrease to 17
million, at point R.
The original demand curve D0, like every demand curve, is based on the ceteris paribus assumption that no
other economically relevant factors change. Now imagine that the economy expands in a way that raises the
incomes of many people, making cars more affordable. How will this affect demand? How can we show this
graphically?
Return to Figure 3.5. The price of cars is still $20,000, but with higher incomes, the quantity demanded has
now increased to 20 million cars, shown at point S. As a result of the higher income levels, the demand curve
shifts to the right to the new demand curve D1, indicating an increase in demand. Table 3.4 shows clearly that
this increased demand would occur at every price, not just the original one.
CLEAR IT UP
3.2 • Shifts in Demand and Supply for Goods and Services
55

FIGURE 3.5 Shifts in Demand: A Car Example Increased demand means that at every given price, the quantity
demanded is higher, so that the demand curve shifts to the right from D0 to D1. Decreased demand means that at
every given price, the quantity demanded is lower, so that the demand curve shifts to the left from D0 to D2.
Price
Decrease to D2
Original Quantity Demanded D0
Increase to D1
$16,000
17.6 million
22.0 million
24.0 million
$18,000
16.0 million
20.0 million
22.0 million
$20,000
14.4 million
18.0 million
20.0 million
$22,000
13.6 million
17.0 million
19.0 million
$24,000
13.2 million
16.5 million
18.5 million
$26,000
12.8 million
16.0 million
18.0 million
TABLE 3.4 Price and Demand Shifts: A Car Example
Now, imagine that the economy slows down so that many people lose their jobs or work fewer hours, reducing
their incomes. In this case, the decrease in income would lead to a lower quantity of cars demanded at every
given price, and the original demand curve D0 would shift left to D2. The shift from D0 to D2 represents such a
decrease in demand: At any given price level, the quantity demanded is now lower. In this example, a price of
$20,000 means 18 million cars sold along the original demand curve, but only 14.4 million sold after demand
fell.
When a demand curve shifts, it does not mean that the quantity demanded by every individual buyer changes
by the same amount. In this example, not everyone would have higher or lower income and not everyone
would buy or not buy an additional car. Instead, a shift in a demand curve captures a pattern for the market as
a whole.
In the previous section, we argued that higher income causes greater demand at every price. This is true for
most goods and services. For some—luxury cars, vacations in Europe, and fine jewelry—the effect of a rise in
income can be especially pronounced. A product whose demand rises when income rises, and vice versa, is
called a normal good. A few exceptions to this pattern do exist. As incomes rise, many people will buy fewer
56
3 • Demand and Supply
Access for free at openstax.org

generic brand groceries and more name brand groceries. They are less likely to buy used cars and more likely
to buy new cars. They will be less likely to rent an apartment and more likely to own a home. A product whose
demand falls when income rises, and vice versa, is called an inferior good. In other words, when income
increases, the demand curve shifts to the left.
Other Factors That Shift Demand Curves
Income is not the only factor that causes a shift in demand. Other factors that change demand include tastes
and preferences, the composition or size of the population, the prices of related goods, and even expectations.
A change in any one of the underlying factors that determine what quantity people are willing to buy at a given
price will cause a shift in demand. Graphically, the new demand curve lies either to the right (an increase) or to
the left (a decrease) of the original demand curve. Let’s look at these factors.
Changing Tastes or Preferences
From 1980 to 2021, the per-person consumption of chicken by Americans rose from 47 pounds per year to 97
pounds per year, and consumption of beef fell from 76 pounds per year to 59 pounds per year, according to the
U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA). Changes like these are largely due to movements in taste, which
change the quantity of a good demanded at every price: that is, they shift the demand curve for that good,
rightward for chicken and leftward for beef.
Changes in the Composition of the Population
The proportion of elderly citizens in the United States population is rising. It rose from 9.8% in 1970 to 12.6%
in 2000, and will be a projected (by the U.S. Census Bureau) 20% of the population by 2030. A society with
relatively more children, like the United States in the 1960s, will have greater demand for goods and services
like tricycles and day care facilities. A society with relatively more elderly persons, as the United States is
projected to have by 2030, has a higher demand for nursing homes and hearing aids. Similarly, changes in the
size of the population can affect the demand for housing and many other goods. Each of these changes in
demand will be shown as a shift in the demand curve.
Changes in the Prices of Related Goods
Changes in the prices of related goods such as substitutes or complements also can affect the demand for a
product. A substitute is a good or service that we can use in place of another good or service. As electronic
books, like this one, become more available, you would expect to see a decrease in demand for traditional
printed books. A lower price for a substitute decreases demand for the other product. For example, in recent
years as the price of tablet computers has fallen, the quantity demanded has increased (because of the law of
demand). Since people are purchasing tablets, there has been a decrease in demand for laptops, which we can
show graphically as a leftward shift in the demand curve for laptops. A higher price for a substitute good has
the reverse effect.
Other goods are complements for each other, meaning we often use the goods together, because consumption
of one good tends to enhance consumption of the other. Examples include breakfast cereal and milk;
notebooks and pens or pencils, golf balls and golf clubs; gasoline and sport utility vehicles; and the five-way
combination of bacon, lettuce, tomato, mayonnaise, and bread. If the price of golf clubs rises, since the
quantity demanded of golf clubs falls (because of the law of demand), demand for a complement good like golf
balls decreases, too. Similarly, a higher price for skis would shift the demand curve for a complement good like
ski resort trips to the left, while a lower price for a complement has the reverse effect.
Changes in Expectations about Future Prices or Other Factors that Affect Demand
While it is clear that the price of a good affects the quantity demanded, it is also true that expectations about
the future price (or expectations about tastes and preferences, income, and so on) can affect demand. For
example, if people hear that a hurricane is coming, they may rush to the store to buy flashlight batteries and
bottled water. If people learn that the price of a good like coffee is likely to rise in the future, they may head for
3.2 • Shifts in Demand and Supply for Goods and Services
57

the store to stock up on coffee now. We show these changes in demand as shifts in the curve. Therefore, a shift
in demand happens when a change in some economic factor (other than price) causes a different quantity to
be demanded at every price. The following Work It Out feature shows how this happens.
Shift in Demand
A shift in demand means that at any price (and at every price), the quantity demanded will be different than it
was before. Following is an example of a shift in demand due to an income increase.
Step 1. Draw the graph of a demand curve for a normal good like pizza. Pick a price (like P0). Identify the
corresponding Q0. See an example in Figure 3.6.
FIGURE 3.6 Demand Curve We can use the demand curve to identify how much consumers would buy at any
given price.
Step 2. Suppose income increases. As a result of the change, are consumers going to buy more or less pizza? The
answer is more. Draw a dotted horizontal line from the chosen price, through the original quantity demanded, to
the new point with the new Q1. Draw a dotted vertical line down to the horizontal axis and label the new Q1.
Figure 3.7 provides an example.
FIGURE 3.7 Demand Curve with Income Increase With an increase in income, consumers will purchase larger
quantities, pushing demand to the right.
Step 3. Now, shift the curve through the new point. You will see that an increase in income causes an upward (or
rightward) shift in the demand curve, so that at any price the quantities demanded will be higher, as Figure 3.8
illustrates.
WORK IT OUT
58
3 • Demand and Supply
Access for free at openstax.org

FIGURE 3.8 Demand Curve Shifted Right With an increase in income, consumers will purchase larger quantities,
pushing demand to the right, and causing the demand curve to shift right.
Summing Up Factors That Change Demand
Figure 3.9 summarizes six factors that can shift demand curves. The direction of the arrows indicates whether
the demand curve shifts represent an increase in demand or a decrease in demand. Notice that a change in the
price of the good or service itself is not listed among the factors that can shift a demand curve. A change in the
price of a good or service causes a movement along a specific demand curve, and it typically leads to some
change in the quantity demanded, but it does not shift the demand curve.
FIGURE 3.9 Factors That Shift Demand Curves (a) A list of factors that can cause an increase in demand from D0 to
D1. (b) The same factors, if their direction is reversed, can cause a decrease in demand from D0 to D1.
When a demand curve shifts, it will then intersect with a given supply curve at a different equilibrium price
and quantity. We are, however, getting ahead of our story. Before discussing how changes in demand can affect
equilibrium price and quantity, we first need to discuss shifts in supply curves.
How Production Costs Affect Supply
A supply curve shows how quantity supplied will change as the price rises and falls, assuming ceteris paribus
so that no other economically relevant factors are changing. If other factors relevant to supply do change, then
the entire supply curve will shift. Just as we described a shift in demand as a change in the quantity demanded
at every price, a shift in supply means a change in the quantity supplied at every price.
In thinking about the factors that affect supply, remember what motivates firms: profits, which are the
difference between revenues and costs. A firm produces goods and services using combinations of labor,
materials, and machinery, or what we call inputs or factors of production. If a firm faces lower costs of
production, while the prices for the good or service the firm produces remain unchanged, a firm’s profits go
3.2 • Shifts in Demand and Supply for Goods and Services
59

up. When a firm’s profits increase, it is more motivated to produce output, since the more it produces the more
profit it will earn. When costs of production fall, a firm will tend to supply a larger quantity at any given price
for its output. We can show this by the supply curve shifting to the right.
Take, for example, a messenger company that delivers packages around a city. The company may find that
buying gasoline is one of its main costs. If the price of gasoline falls, then the company will find it can deliver
messages more cheaply than before. Since lower costs correspond to higher profits, the messenger company
may now supply more of its services at any given price. For example, given the lower gasoline prices, the
company can now serve a greater area, and increase its supply.
Conversely, if a firm faces higher costs of production, then it will earn lower profits at any given selling price for
its products. As a result, a higher cost of production typically causes a firm to supply a smaller quantity at any
given price. In this case, the supply curve shifts to the left.
Consider the supply for cars, shown by curve S0 in Figure 3.10. Point J indicates that if the price is $20,000, the
quantity supplied will be 18 million cars. If the price rises to $22,000 per car, ceteris paribus, the quantity
supplied will rise to 20 million cars, as point K on the S0 curve shows. We can show the same information in
table form, as in Table 3.5.
FIGURE 3.10 Shifts in Supply: A Car Example Decreased supply means that at every given price, the quantity
supplied is lower, so that the supply curve shifts to the left, from S0 to S1. Increased supply means that at every
given price, the quantity supplied is higher, so that the supply curve shifts to the right, from S0 to S2.
Price
Decrease to S1
Original Quantity Supplied S0
Increase to S2
$16,000
10.5 million
12.0 million
13.2 million
$18,000
13.5 million
15.0 million
16.5 million
$20,000
16.5 million
18.0 million
19.8 million
$22,000
18.5 million
20.0 million
22.0 million
$24,000
19.5 million
21.0 million
23.1 million
$26,000
20.5 million
22.0 million
24.2 million
TABLE 3.5 Price and Shifts in Supply: A Car Example
60
3 • Demand and Supply
Access for free at openstax.org

Now, imagine that the price of steel, an important ingredient in manufacturing cars, rises, so that producing a
car has become more expensive. At any given price for selling cars, car manufacturers will react by supplying a
lower quantity. We can show this graphically as a leftward shift of supply, from S0 to S1, which indicates that at
any given price, the quantity supplied decreases. In this example, at a price of $20,000, the quantity supplied
decreases from 18 million on the original supply curve (S0) to 16.5 million on the supply curve S1, which is
labeled as point L.
Conversely, if the price of steel decreases, producing a car becomes less expensive. At any given price for
selling cars, car manufacturers can now expect to earn higher profits, so they will supply a higher quantity. The
shift of supply to the right, from S0 to S2, means that at all prices, the quantity supplied has increased. In this
example, at a price of $20,000, the quantity supplied increases from 18 million on the original supply curve
(S0) to 19.8 million on the supply curve S2, which is labeled M.
Other Factors That Affect Supply
In the example above, we saw that changes in the prices of inputs in the production process will affect the cost
of production and thus the supply. Several other things affect the cost of production, too, such as changes in
weather or other natural conditions, new technologies for production, and some government policies.
Changes in weather and climate will affect the cost of production for many agricultural products. For example,
in 2014 the Manchurian Plain in Northeastern China, which produces most of the country's wheat, corn, and
soybeans, experienced its most severe drought in 50 years. A drought decreases the supply of agricultural
products, which means that at any given price, a lower quantity will be supplied. Conversely, especially good
weather would shift the supply curve to the right.
When a firm discovers a new technology that allows the firm to produce at a lower cost, the supply curve will
shift to the right, as well. For instance, in the 1960s a major scientific effort nicknamed the Green Revolution
focused on breeding improved seeds for basic crops like wheat and rice. By the early 1990s, more than two-
thirds of the wheat and rice in low-income countries around the world used these Green Revolution seeds—and
the harvest was twice as high per acre. A technological improvement that reduces costs of production will shift
supply to the right, so that a greater quantity will be produced at any given price.
Government policies can affect the cost of production and the supply curve through taxes, regulations, and
subsidies. For example, the U.S. government imposes a tax on alcoholic beverages that collects about $8 billion
per year from producers. Businesses treat taxes as costs. Higher costs decrease supply for the reasons we
discussed above. Other examples of policy that can affect cost are the wide array of government regulations
that require firms to spend money to provide a cleaner environment or a safer workplace. Complying with
regulations increases costs.
A government subsidy, on the other hand, is the opposite of a tax. A subsidy occurs when the government pays
a firm directly or reduces the firm’s taxes if the firm carries out certain actions. From the firm’s perspective,
taxes or regulations are an additional cost of production that shifts supply to the left, leading the firm to
produce a lower quantity at every given price. Government subsidies reduce the cost of production and
increase supply at every given price, shifting supply to the right. The following Work It Out feature shows how
this shift happens.
Shift in Supply
We know that a supply curve shows the minimum price a firm will accept to produce a given quantity of output.
What happens to the supply curve when the cost of production goes up? Following is an example of a shift in
supply due to a production cost increase. (We’ll introduce some other concepts regarding firm decision-making in
WORK IT OUT
3.2 • Shifts in Demand and Supply for Goods and Services
61

Chapters 7 and 8.)
Step 1. Draw a graph of a supply curve for pizza. Pick a quantity (like Q0). If you draw a vertical line up from Q0 to
the supply curve, you will see the price the firm chooses. Figure 3.11 provides an example.
FIGURE 3.11 Supply Curve You can use a supply curve to show the minimum price a firm will accept to produce
a given quantity of output.
Step 2. Why did the firm choose that price and not some other? One way to think about this is that the price is
composed of two parts. The first part is the cost of producing pizzas at the margin; in this case, the cost of
producing the pizza, including cost of ingredients (e.g., dough, sauce, cheese, and pepperoni), the cost of the
pizza oven, the shop rent, and the workers' wages. The second part is the firm’s desired profit, which is
determined, among other factors, by the profit margins in that particular business. (Desired profit is not
necessarily the same as economic profit, which will be explained in Chapter 7.) If you add these two parts
together, you get the price the firm wishes to charge. The quantity Q0 and associated price P0 give you one point
on the firm’s supply curve, as Figure 3.12 illustrates.
FIGURE 3.12 Setting Prices The cost of production and the desired profit equal the price a firm will set for a
product.
Step 3. Now, suppose that the cost of production increases. Perhaps cheese has become more expensive by
$0.75 per pizza. If that is true, the firm will want to raise its price by the amount of the increase in cost ($0.75).
Draw this point on the supply curve directly above the initial point on the curve, but $0.75 higher, as Figure 3.13
shows.
62
3 • Demand and Supply
Access for free at openstax.org

FIGURE 3.13 Increasing Costs Leads to Increasing Price Because the cost of production and the desired profit
equal the price a firm will set for a product, if the cost of production increases, the price for the product will also
need to increase.
Step 4. Shift the supply curve through this point. You will see that an increase in cost causes an upward (or a
leftward) shift of the supply curve so that at any price, the quantities supplied will be smaller, as Figure 3.14
illustrates.
FIGURE 3.14 Supply Curve Shifts When the cost of production increases, the supply curve shifts upwardly to a
new price level.
Summing Up Factors That Change Supply
Changes in the cost of inputs, natural disasters, new technologies, and the impact of government decisions all
affect the cost of production. In turn, these factors affect how much firms are willing to supply at any given
price.
Figure 3.15 summarizes factors that change the supply of goods and services. Notice that a change in the price
of the product itself is not among the factors that shift the supply curve. Although a change in price of a good or
service typically causes a change in quantity supplied or a movement along the supply curve for that specific
good or service, it does not cause the supply curve itself to shift.
3.2 • Shifts in Demand and Supply for Goods and Services
63

FIGURE 3.15 Factors That Shift Supply Curves (a) A list of factors that can cause an increase in supply from S0 to
S1. (b) The same factors, if their direction is reversed, can cause a decrease in supply from S0 to S1.
Because demand and supply curves appear on a two-dimensional diagram with only price and quantity on the
axes, an unwary visitor to the land of economics might be fooled into believing that economics is about only
four topics: demand, supply, price, and quantity. However, demand and supply are really “umbrella” concepts:
demand covers all the factors that affect demand, and supply covers all the factors that affect supply. We
include factors other than price that affect demand and supply by using shifts in the demand or the supply
curve. In this way, the two-dimensional demand and supply model becomes a powerful tool for analyzing a
wide range of economic circumstances.
3.3 Changes in Equilibrium Price and Quantity: The Four-Step Process
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
•
Identify equilibrium price and quantity through the four-step process
•
Graph equilibrium price and quantity
•
Contrast shifts of demand or supply and movements along a demand or supply curve
•
Graph demand and supply curves, including equilibrium price and quantity, based on real-world
examples
Let’s begin this discussion with a single economic event. It might be an event that affects demand, like a
change in income, population, tastes, prices of substitutes or complements, or expectations about future
prices. It might be an event that affects supply, like a change in natural conditions, input prices, or technology,
or government policies that affect production. How does this economic event affect equilibrium price and
quantity? We will analyze this question using a four-step process.
Step 1. Draw a demand and supply model before the economic change took place. To establish the model
requires four standard pieces of information: The law of demand, which tells us the slope of the demand curve
is negative; the law of supply, which tells us that the slope of the supply curve is positive; the shift variables for
demand; and the shift variables for supply. From this model, find the initial equilibrium values for price and
quantity.
Step 2. Decide whether the economic change you are analyzing affects demand or supply. In other words, does
the event refer to something in the list of demand factors or supply factors?
Step 3. Decide whether the effect on demand or supply causes the curve to shift to the right or to the left, and
sketch the new demand or supply curve on the diagram. In other words, does the event increase or decrease
the amount consumers want to buy or producers want to sell?
Step 4. Identify the new equilibrium and then compare the original equilibrium price and quantity to the new
equilibrium price and quantity.
64
3 • Demand and Supply
Access for free at openstax.org

Let’s consider one example that involves a shift in supply and one that involves a shift in demand. Then we will
consider an example where both supply and demand shift.
Good Weather for Salmon Fishing
Suppose that during the summer of 2015, weather conditions were excellent for commercial salmon fishing off
the California coast. Heavy rains meant higher than normal levels of water in the rivers, which helps the
salmon to breed. Slightly cooler ocean temperatures stimulated the growth of plankton, the microscopic
organisms at the bottom of the ocean food chain, providing everything in the ocean with a hearty food supply.
The ocean stayed calm during fishing season, so commercial fishing operations did not lose many days to bad
weather. How did these climate conditions affect the quantity and price of salmon? Figure 3.16 illustrates the
four-step approach, which we explain below, to work through this problem. Table 3.6 also provides the
information to work the problem.
FIGURE 3.16 Good Weather for Salmon Fishing: The Four-Step Process Unusually good weather leads to changes
in the price and quantity of salmon.
Price per Pound
Quantity Supplied in 2014
Quantity Supplied in 2015
Quantity Demanded
$2.00
80
400
840
$2.25
120
480
680
$2.50
160
550
550
$2.75
200
600
450
$3.00
230
640
350
$3.25
250
670
250
$3.50
270
700
200
TABLE 3.6 Salmon Fishing
Step 1. Draw a demand and supply model to illustrate the market for salmon in the year before the good
weather conditions began. The demand curve D0 and the supply curve S0 show that the original equilibrium
3.3 • Changes in Equilibrium Price and Quantity: The Four-Step Process
65

price is $3.25 per pound and the original equilibrium quantity is 250,000 fish. (This price per pound is what
commercial buyers pay at the fishing docks. What consumers pay at the grocery is higher.)
Step 2. Did the economic event affect supply or demand? Good weather is an example of a natural condition
that affects supply.
Step 3. Was the effect on supply an increase or a decrease? Good weather is a change in natural conditions that
increases the quantity supplied at any given price. The supply curve shifts to the right, moving from the
original supply curve S0 to the new supply curve S1, which Figure 3.16 and Table 3.6 show.
Step 4. Compare the new equilibrium price and quantity to the original equilibrium. At the new equilibrium E1,
the equilibrium price falls from $3.25 to $2.50, but the equilibrium quantity increases from 250,000 to
550,000 salmon. Notice that the equilibrium quantity demanded increased, even though the demand curve
did not move.
In short, good weather conditions increased supply of the California commercial salmon. The result was a
higher equilibrium quantity of salmon bought and sold in the market at a lower price.
Newspapers and the Internet
According to the Pew Research Center for People and the Press, increasingly more people, especially younger
people, are obtaining their news from online and digital sources. The majority of U.S. adults now own
smartphones or tablets, and most of those Americans say they use them in part to access the news. From 2004
to 2012, the share of Americans who reported obtaining their news from digital sources increased from 24% to
39%. How has this affected consumption of print news media, and radio and television news? Figure 3.17 and
the text below illustrates using the four-step analysis to answer this question.
FIGURE 3.17 The Print News Market: A Four-Step Analysis A change in tastes from print news sources to digital
sources results in a leftward shift in demand for the former. The result is a decrease in both equilibrium price and
quantity.
Step 1. Develop a demand and supply model to think about what the market looked like before the event. The
demand curve D0 and the supply curve S0 show the original relationships. In this case, we perform the analysis
without specific numbers on the price and quantity axis.
Step 2. Did the described change affect supply or demand? A change in tastes, from traditional news sources
(print, radio, and television) to digital sources, caused a change in demand for the former.
Step 3. Was the effect on demand positive or negative? A shift to digital news sources will tend to mean a lower
66
3 • Demand and Supply
Access for free at openstax.org

quantity demanded of traditional news sources at every given price, causing the demand curve for print and
other traditional news sources to shift to the left, from D0 to D1.
Step 4. Compare the new equilibrium price and quantity to the original equilibrium price. The new equilibrium
(E1) occurs at a lower quantity and a lower price than the original equilibrium (E0).
The decline in print news reading predates 2004. Print newspaper circulation peaked in 1973 and has
declined since then due to competition from television and radio news. In 1991, 55% of Americans indicated
they received their news from print sources, while only 29% did so in 2012. Radio news has followed a similar
path in recent decades, with the share of Americans obtaining their news from radio declining from 54% in
1991 to 33% in 2012. Television news has held its own in recent years, with a market share staying in the mid
to upper fifties. What does this suggest for the future, given that two-thirds of Americans under 30 years old
say they do not obtain their news from television at all?
The Interconnections and Speed of Adjustment in Real Markets
In the real world, many factors that affect demand and supply can change all at once. For example, the demand
for cars might increase because of rising incomes and population, and it might decrease because of rising
gasoline prices (a complementary good). Likewise, the supply of cars might increase because of innovative new
technologies that reduce the cost of car production, and it might decrease as a result of new government
regulations requiring the installation of costly pollution-control technology.
Moreover, rising incomes and population or changes in gasoline prices will affect many markets, not just cars.
How can an economist sort out all these interconnected events? The answer lies in the ceteris paribus
assumption. Look at how each economic event affects each market, one event at a time, holding all else
constant. Then combine the analyses to see the net effect.
A Combined Example
The U.S. Postal Service is facing difficult challenges. Compensation for postal workers tends to increase most
years due to cost-of-living increases. At the same time, increasingly more people are using email, text, and
other digital message forms such as Facebook and Twitter to communicate with friends and others. What does
this suggest about the continued viability of the Postal Service? Figure 3.18 and the text below illustrate this
using the four-step analysis to answer this question.
FIGURE 3.18 Higher Compensation for Postal Workers: A Four-Step Analysis (a) Higher labor compensation causes
3.3 • Changes in Equilibrium Price and Quantity: The Four-Step Process
67

a leftward shift in the supply curve, a decrease in the equilibrium quantity, and an increase in the equilibrium price.
(b) A change in tastes away from Postal Services causes a leftward shift in the demand curve, a decrease in the
equilibrium quantity, and a decrease in the equilibrium price.
Since this problem involves two disturbances, we need two four-step analyses, the first to analyze the effects of
higher compensation for postal workers, the second to analyze the effects of many people switching from
“snail mail” to email and other digital messages.
Figure 3.18 (a) shows the shift in supply discussed in the following steps.
Step 1. Draw a demand and supply model to illustrate what the market for the U.S. Postal Service looked like
before this scenario starts. The demand curve D0 and the supply curve S0 show the original relationships.
Step 2. Did the described change affect supply or demand? Labor compensation is a cost of production. A
change in production costs caused a change in supply for the Postal Service.
Step 3. Was the effect on supply positive or negative? Higher labor compensation leads to a lower quantity
supplied of postal services at every given price, causing the supply curve for postal services to shift to the left,
from S0 to S1.
Step 4. Compare the new equilibrium price and quantity to the original equilibrium price. The new equilibrium
(E1) occurs at a lower quantity and a higher price than the original equilibrium (E0).
Figure 3.18 (b) shows the shift in demand in the following steps.
Step 1. Draw a demand and supply model to illustrate what the market for U.S. Postal Services looked like
before this scenario starts. The demand curve D0 and the supply curve S0 show the original relationships. Note
that this diagram is independent from the diagram in panel (a).
Step 2. Did the change described affect supply or demand? A change in tastes away from snail mail toward
digital messages will cause a change in demand for the Postal Service.
Step 3. Was the effect on demand positive or negative? A change in tastes away from snailmail toward digital
messages causes lower quantity demanded of postal services at every given price, causing the demand curve
for postal services to shift to the left, from D0 to D1.
Step 4. Compare the new equilibrium price and quantity to the original equilibrium price. The new equilibrium
(E2) occurs at a lower quantity and a lower price than the original equilibrium (E0).
The final step in a scenario where both supply and demand shift is to combine the two individual analyses to
determine what happens to the equilibrium quantity and price. Graphically, we superimpose the previous two
diagrams one on top of the other, as in Figure 3.19.
68
3 • Demand and Supply
Access for free at openstax.org

FIGURE 3.19 Combined Effect of Decreased Demand and Decreased Supply Supply and demand shifts cause
changes in equilibrium price and quantity.
Following are the results:
Effect on Quantity: The effect of higher labor compensation on Postal Services because it raises the cost of
production is to decrease the equilibrium quantity. The effect of a change in tastes away from snail mail is to
decrease the equilibrium quantity. Since both shifts are to the left, the overall impact is a decrease in the
equilibrium quantity of Postal Services (Q3). This is easy to see graphically, since Q3 is to the left of Q0.
Effect on Price: The overall effect on price is more complicated. The effect of higher labor compensation on
Postal Services, because it raises the cost of production, is to increase the equilibrium price. The effect of a
change in tastes away from snail mail is to decrease the equilibrium price. Since the two effects are in opposite
directions, unless we know the magnitudes of the two effects, the overall effect is unclear. This is not unusual.
When both curves shift, typically we can determine the overall effect on price or on quantity, but not on both.
In this case, we determined the overall effect on the equilibrium quantity, but not on the equilibrium price. In
other cases, it might be the opposite.
The next Clear It Up feature focuses on the difference between shifts of supply or demand and movements
along a curve.
What is the difference between shifts of demand or supply versus movements along a demand or
supply curve?
One common mistake in applying the demand and supply framework is to confuse the shift of a demand or a supply
curve with movement along a demand or supply curve. As an example, consider a problem that asks whether a
drought will increase or decrease the equilibrium quantity and equilibrium price of wheat. Lee, a student in an
introductory economics class, might reason:
“Well, it is clear that a drought reduces supply, so I will shift back the supply curve, as in the shift from the original
supply curve S0 to S1 on the diagram (Shift 1). The equilibrium moves from E0 to E1, the equilibrium quantity is lower
and the equilibrium price is higher. Then, a higher price makes farmers more likely to supply the good, so the supply
curve shifts right, as shows the shift from S1 to S2, shows on the diagram (Shift 2), so that the equilibrium now
moves from E1 to E2. The higher price, however, also reduces demand and so causes demand to shift back, like the
CLEAR IT UP
3.3 • Changes in Equilibrium Price and Quantity: The Four-Step Process
69

shift from the original demand curve, D0 to D1 on the diagram (labeled Shift 3), and the equilibrium moves from E2 to
E3.”
FIGURE 3.20 Shifts of Demand or Supply versus Movements along a Demand or Supply Curve A shift in one curve
never causes a shift in the other curve. Rather, a shift in one curve causes a movement along the second curve.
At about this point, Lee suspects that this answer is headed down the wrong path. Think about what might be wrong
with Lee’s logic, and then read the answer that follows.
Answer: Lee’s first step is correct: that is, a drought shifts back the supply curve of wheat and leads to a prediction
of a lower equilibrium quantity and a higher equilibrium price. This corresponds to a movement along the original
demand curve (D0), from E0 to E1. The rest of Lee’s argument is wrong, because it mixes up shifts in supply with
quantity supplied, and shifts in demand with quantity demanded. A higher or lower price never shifts the supply
curve, as suggested by the shift in supply from S1 to S2. Instead, a price change leads to a movement along a given
supply curve. Similarly, a higher or lower price never shifts a demand curve, as suggested in the shift from D0 to D1.
Instead, a price change leads to a movement along a given demand curve. Remember, a change in the price of a
good never causes the demand or supply curve for that good to shift.
Think carefully about the timeline of events: What happens first, what happens next? What is cause, what is effect?
If you keep the order right, you are more likely to get the analysis correct.
In the four-step analysis of how economic events affect equilibrium price and quantity, the movement from the
old to the new equilibrium seems immediate. As a practical matter, however, prices and quantities often do not
zoom straight to equilibrium. More realistically, when an economic event causes demand or supply to shift,
prices and quantities set off in the general direction of equilibrium. Even as they are moving toward one new
equilibrium, a subsequent change in demand or supply often pushes prices toward another equilibrium.
3.4 Price Ceilings and Price Floors
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
•
Explain price controls, price ceilings, and price floors
•
Analyze demand and supply as a social adjustment mechanism
To this point in the chapter, we have been assuming that markets are free, that is, they operate with no
government intervention. In this section, we will explore the outcomes, both anticipated and otherwise, when
government does intervene in a market either to prevent the price of some good or service from rising “too
high” or to prevent the price of some good or service from falling “too low”.
Economists believe there are a small number of fundamental principles that explain how economic agents
70
3 • Demand and Supply
Access for free at openstax.org

respond in different situations. Two of these principles, which we have already introduced, are the laws of
demand and supply.
Governments can pass laws affecting market outcomes, but no law can negate these economic principles.
Rather, the principles will become apparent in sometimes unexpected ways, which may undermine the intent
of the government policy. This is one of the major conclusions of this section.
Controversy sometimes surrounds the prices and quantities established by demand and supply, especially for
products that are considered necessities. In some cases, discontent over prices turns into public pressure on
politicians, who may then pass legislation to prevent a certain price from climbing “too high” or falling “too
low.”
The demand and supply model shows how people and firms will react to the incentives that these laws provide
to control prices, in ways that will often lead to undesirable consequences. Alternative policy tools can often
achieve the desired goals of price control laws, while avoiding at least some of their costs and tradeoffs.
Price Ceilings
Laws that governments enact to regulate prices are called price controls. Price controls come in two flavors. A
price ceiling keeps a price from rising above a certain level (the “ceiling”), while a price floor keeps a price
from falling below a given level (the “floor”). This section uses the demand and supply framework to analyze
price ceilings. The next section discusses price floors.
A price ceiling is a legal maximum price that one pays for some good or service. A government imposes price
ceilings in order to keep the price of some necessary good or service affordable. For example, in 2005 during
Hurricane Katrina, the price of bottled water increased above $5 per gallon. As a result, many people called for
price controls on bottled water to prevent the price from rising so high. In this particular case, the government
did not impose a price ceiling, but there are other examples of where price ceilings did occur.
In many markets for goods and services, demanders outnumber suppliers. Consumers, who are also potential
voters, sometimes unite behind a political proposal to hold down a certain price. In some cities, such as
Albany, renters have pressed political leaders to pass rent control laws, a price ceiling that usually works by
stating that landlords can raise rents by only a certain maximum percentage each year. Some of the best
examples of rent control occur in urban areas such as New York, Washington D.C., or San Francisco.
Rent control becomes a politically hot topic when rents begin to rise rapidly. Everyone needs an affordable
place to live. Perhaps a change in tastes makes a certain suburb or town a more popular place to live. Perhaps
locally-based businesses expand, bringing higher incomes and more people into the area. Such changes can
cause a change in the demand for rental housing, as Figure 3.21 illustrates. The original equilibrium (E0) lies at
the intersection of supply curve S0 and demand curve D0, corresponding to an equilibrium price of $500 and
an equilibrium quantity of 15,000 units of rental housing. The effect of greater income or a change in tastes is
to shift the demand curve for rental housing to the right, as the data in Table 3.7 shows and the shift from D0 to
D1 on the graph. In this market, at the new equilibrium E1, the price of a rental unit would rise to $600 and the
equilibrium quantity would increase to 17,000 units.
3.4 • Price Ceilings and Price Floors
71

FIGURE 3.21 A Price Ceiling Example—Rent Control The original intersection of demand and supply occurs at E0. If
demand shifts from D0 to D1, the new equilibrium would be at E1—unless a price ceiling prevents the price from
rising. If the price is not permitted to rise, the quantity supplied remains at 15,000. However, after the change in
demand, the quantity demanded rises to 19,000, resulting in a shortage.
Price
Original Quantity Supplied
Original Quantity Demanded
New Quantity Demanded
$400
12,000
18,000
23,000
$500
15,000
15,000
19,000
$600
17,000
13,000
17,000
$700
19,000
11,000
15,000
$800
20,000
10,000
14,000
TABLE 3.7 Rent Control
Suppose that a city government passes a rent control law to keep the price at the original equilibrium of $500
for a typical apartment. In Figure 3.21, the horizontal line at the price of $500 shows the legally fixed
maximum price set by the rent control law. However, the underlying forces that shifted the demand curve to
the right are still there. At that price ($500), the quantity supplied remains at the same 15,000 rental units, but
the quantity demanded is 19,000 rental units. In other words, the quantity demanded exceeds the quantity
supplied, so there is a shortage of rental housing. One of the ironies of price ceilings is that while the price
ceiling was intended to help renters, there are actually fewer apartments rented out under the price ceiling
(15,000 rental units) than would be the case at the market rent of $600 (17,000 rental units).
Price ceilings do not simply benefit renters at the expense of landlords. Rather, some renters (or potential
renters) lose their housing as landlords convert apartments to co-ops and condos. Even when the housing
remains in the rental market, landlords tend to spend less on maintenance and on essentials like heating,
cooling, hot water, and lighting. The first rule of economics is you do not get something for nothing—everything
has an opportunity cost. Thus, if renters obtain “cheaper” housing than the market requires, they tend to also
end up with lower quality housing.
Price ceilings are enacted in an attempt to keep prices low for those who need the product. However, when the
market price is not allowed to rise to the equilibrium level, quantity demanded exceeds quantity supplied, and
thus a shortage occurs. Those who manage to purchase the product at the lower price given by the price ceiling
will benefit, but sellers of the product will suffer, along with those who are not able to purchase the product at
all. Quality is also likely to deteriorate.
72
3 • Demand and Supply
Access for free at openstax.org

Price Floors
A price floor is the lowest price that one can legally pay for some good or service. Perhaps the best-known
example of a price floor is the minimum wage, which is based on the view that someone working full time
should be able to afford a basic standard of living. The federal minimum wage in 2022 was $7.25 per hour,
although some states and localities have a higher minimum wage. The federal minimum wage yields an annual
income for a single person of $15,080, which is slightly higher than the Federal poverty line of $11,880.
Congress periodically raises the federal minimum wage as the cost of living rises. As of March 2022, the most
recent adjustment occurred in 2009, when the federal minimum wage was raised from $6.55 to $7.25.
Price floors are sometimes called “price supports,” because they support a price by preventing it from falling
below a certain level. Around the world, many countries have passed laws to create agricultural price supports.
Farm prices and thus farm incomes fluctuate, sometimes widely. Even if, on average, farm incomes are
adequate, some years they can be quite low. The purpose of price supports is to prevent these swings.
The most common way price supports work is that the government enters the market and buys up the product,
adding to demand to keep prices higher than they otherwise would be. According to the Common Agricultural
Policy reform effective in 2019, the European Union (EU) will spend about 58 billion euros per year, or 65.5
billion dollars per year (with the December 2021 exchange rate), or roughly 36% of the EU budget, on price
supports for Europe’s farmers.
Figure 3.22 illustrates the effects of a government program that assures a price above the equilibrium by
focusing on the market for wheat in Europe. In the absence of government intervention, the price would adjust
so that the quantity supplied would equal the quantity demanded at the equilibrium point E0, with price P0 and
quantity Q0. However, policies to keep prices high for farmers keep the price above what would have been the
market equilibrium level—the price Pf shown by the dashed horizontal line in the diagram. The result is a
quantity supplied in excess of the quantity demanded (Qd). When quantity supplied exceeds quantity
demanded, a surplus exists.
Economists estimate that the high-income areas of the world, including the United States, Europe, and Japan,
spend roughly $1 billion per day in supporting their farmers. If the government is willing to purchase the
excess supply (or to provide payments for others to purchase it), then farmers will benefit from the price floor,
but taxpayers and consumers of food will pay the costs. Agricultural economists and policy makers have
offered numerous proposals for reducing farm subsidies. In many countries, however, political support for
subsidies for farmers remains strong. This is either because the population views this as supporting the
traditional rural way of life or because of industry's lobbying power of the agro-business.
3.4 • Price Ceilings and Price Floors
73

FIGURE 3.22 European Wheat Prices: A Price Floor Example The intersection of demand (D) and supply (S) would
be at the equilibrium point E0. However, a price floor set at Pf holds the price above E0 and prevents it from falling.
The result of the price floor is that the quantity supplied Qs exceeds the quantity demanded Qd. There is excess
supply, also called a surplus.
3.5 Demand, Supply, and Efficiency
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
•
Contrast consumer surplus, producer surplus, and social surplus
•
Explain why price floors and price ceilings can be inefficient
•
Analyze demand and supply as a social adjustment mechanism
The familiar demand and supply diagram holds within it the concept of economic efficiency. One typical way
that economists define efficiency is when it is impossible to improve the situation of one party without
imposing a cost on another. Conversely, if a situation is inefficient, it becomes possible to benefit at least one
party without imposing costs on others.
Efficiency in the demand and supply model has the same basic meaning: The economy is getting as much
benefit as possible from its scarce resources and all the possible gains from trade have been achieved. In other
words, the optimal amount of each good and service is produced and consumed.
Consumer Surplus, Producer Surplus, Social Surplus
Consider a market for tablet computers, as Figure 3.23 shows. The equilibrium price is $80 and the
equilibrium quantity is 28 million. To see the benefits to consumers, look at the segment of the demand curve
above the equilibrium point and to the left. This portion of the demand curve shows that at least some
demanders would have been willing to pay more than $80 for a tablet.
For example, point J shows that if the price were $90, 20 million tablets would be sold. Those consumers who
would have been willing to pay $90 for a tablet based on the utility they expect to receive from it, but who were
able to pay the equilibrium price of $80, clearly received a benefit beyond what they had to pay. Remember, the
demand curve traces consumers’ willingness to pay for different quantities. The amount that individuals
would have been willing to pay, minus the amount that they actually paid, is called consumer surplus.
Consumer surplus is the area labeled F—that is, the area above the market price and below the demand curve.
74
3 • Demand and Supply
Access for free at openstax.org

FIGURE 3.23 Consumer and Producer Surplus The somewhat triangular area labeled by F shows the area of
consumer surplus, which shows that the equilibrium price in the market was less than what many of the consumers
were willing to pay. Point J on the demand curve shows that, even at the price of $90, consumers would have been
willing to purchase a quantity of 20 million. The somewhat triangular area labeled by G shows the area of producer
surplus, which shows that the equilibrium price received in the market was more than what many of the producers
were willing to accept for their products. For example, point K on the supply curve shows that at a price of $45, firms
would have been willing to supply a quantity of 14 million.
The supply curve shows the quantity that firms are willing to supply at each price. For example, point K in
Figure 3.23 illustrates that, at $45, firms would still have been willing to supply a quantity of 14 million. Those
producers who would have been willing to supply the tablets at $45, but who were instead able to charge the
equilibrium price of $80, clearly received an extra benefit beyond what they required to supply the product.
The extra benefit producers receive from selling a good or service, measured by the price the producer actually
received minus the price the producer would have been willing to accept is called producer surplus. In Figure
3.23, producer surplus is the area labeled G—that is, the area between the market price and the segment of the
supply curve below the equilibrium.
The sum of consumer surplus and producer surplus is social surplus, also referred to as economic surplus or
total surplus. In Figure 3.23 we show social surplus as the area F + G. Social surplus is larger at equilibrium
quantity and price than it would be at any other quantity. This demonstrates the economic efficiency of the
market equilibrium. In addition, at the efficient level of output, it is impossible to produce greater consumer
surplus without reducing producer surplus, and it is impossible to produce greater producer surplus without
reducing consumer surplus.
Inefficiency of Price Floors and Price Ceilings
The imposition of a price floor or a price ceiling will prevent a market from adjusting to its equilibrium price
and quantity, and thus will create an inefficient outcome. However, there is an additional twist here. Along with
creating inefficiency, price floors and ceilings will also transfer some consumer surplus to producers, or some
producer surplus to consumers.
Imagine that several firms develop a promising but expensive new drug for treating back pain. If this therapy
is left to the market, the equilibrium price will be $600 per month and 20,000 people will use the drug, as
shown in Figure 3.24 (a). The original level of consumer surplus is T + U and producer surplus is V + W + X.
However, the government decides to impose a price ceiling of $400 to make the drug more affordable. At this
price ceiling, firms in the market now produce only 15,000.
3.5 • Demand, Supply, and Efficiency
75

As a result, two changes occur. First, an inefficient outcome occurs and the total surplus of society is reduced.
The loss in social surplus that occurs when the economy produces at an inefficient quantity is called
deadweight loss. In a very real sense, it is like money thrown away that benefits no one. In Figure 3.24 (a), the
deadweight loss is the area U + W. When deadweight loss exists, it is possible for both consumer and producer
surplus to be higher, in this case because the price control is blocking some suppliers and demanders from
transactions they would both be willing to make.
A second change from the price ceiling is that some of the producer surplus is transferred to consumers. After
the price ceiling is imposed, the new consumer surplus is T + V, while the new producer surplus is X. In other
words, the price ceiling transfers the area of surplus (V) from producers to consumers. Note that the gain to
consumers is less than the loss to producers, which is just another way of seeing the deadweight loss.
FIGURE 3.24 Efficiency and Price Floors and Ceilings (a) The original equilibrium price is $600 with a quantity of
20,000. Consumer surplus is T + U, and producer surplus is V + W + X. A price ceiling is imposed at $400, so firms in
the market now produce only a quantity of 15,000. As a result, the new consumer surplus is T + V, while the new
producer surplus is X. (b) The original equilibrium is $8 at a quantity of 1,800. Consumer surplus is G + H + J, and
producer surplus is I + K. A price floor is imposed at $12, which means that quantity demanded falls to 1,400. As a
result, the new consumer surplus is G, and the new producer surplus is H + I.
Figure 3.24 (b) shows a price floor example using a string of struggling movie theaters, all in the same city. The
current equilibrium is $8 per movie ticket, with 1,800 people attending movies. The original consumer surplus
is G + H + J, and producer surplus is I + K. The city government is worried that movie theaters will go out of
business, reducing the entertainment options available to citizens, so it decides to impose a price floor of $12
per ticket. As a result, the quantity demanded of movie tickets falls to 1,400. The new consumer surplus is G,
and the new producer surplus is H + I. In effect, the price floor causes the area H to be transferred from
consumer to producer surplus, but also causes a deadweight loss of J + K.
This analysis shows that a price ceiling, like a law establishing rent controls, will transfer some producer
surplus to consumers—which helps to explain why consumers often favor them. Conversely, a price floor like a
guarantee that farmers will receive a certain price for their crops will transfer some consumer surplus to
producers, which explains why producers often favor them. However, both price floors and price ceilings block
some transactions that buyers and sellers would have been willing to make, and creates deadweight loss.
Removing such barriers, so that prices and quantities can adjust to their equilibrium level, will increase the
economy’s social surplus.
Demand and Supply as a Social Adjustment Mechanism
The demand and supply model emphasizes that prices are not set only by demand or only by supply, but by the
76
3 • Demand and Supply
Access for free at openstax.org

interaction between the two. In 1890, the famous economist Alfred Marshall wrote that asking whether supply
or demand determined a price was like arguing “whether it is the upper or the under blade of a pair of scissors
that cuts a piece of paper.” The answer is that both blades of the demand and supply scissors are always
involved.
The adjustments of equilibrium price and quantity in a market-oriented economy often occur without much
government direction or oversight. If the coffee crop in Brazil suffers a terrible frost, then the supply curve of
coffee shifts to the left and the price of coffee rises. Some people continue to drink coffee and pay the higher
price. Others switch to tea or soft drinks. No government commission is needed to figure out how to adjust
coffee prices, which companies will be allowed to process the remaining supply, which supermarkets in which
cities will get how much coffee to sell, or which consumers will ultimately be allowed to drink the brew. Such
adjustments in response to price changes happen all the time in a market economy, often so smoothly and
rapidly that we barely notice them.
Think for a moment of all the seasonal foods that are available and inexpensive at certain times of the year, like
fresh corn in midsummer, but more expensive at other times of the year. People alter their diets and
restaurants alter their menus in response to these fluctuations in prices without fuss or fanfare. For both the
U.S. economy and the world economy as a whole, markets—that is, demand and supply—are the primary social
mechanism for answering the basic questions about what is produced, how it is produced, and for whom it is
produced.
Why Can We Not Get Enough of Organic Food?
Organic food is grown without synthetic pesticides, chemical fertilizers or genetically modified seeds. In recent
decades, the demand for organic products has increased dramatically. The Organic Trade Association reported sales
increased from $1 billion in 1990 to nearly $62 billion in 2020, more than 90% of which were sales of food
products.
Why, then, are organic foods more expensive than their conventional counterparts? The answer is a clear application
of the theories of supply and demand. As people have learned more about the harmful effects of chemical fertilizers,
growth hormones, pesticides and the like from large-scale factory farming, our tastes and preferences for safer,
organic foods have increased. This change in tastes has been reinforced by increases in income, which allow people
to purchase pricier products, and has made organic foods more mainstream. This shift, in addition to population
growth, has led to an increased demand for organic foods. Graphically, the demand curve has shifted right, and we
have moved up the supply curve as producers have responded to the higher prices by supplying a greater quantity.
In addition to the movement along the supply curve, we have also had an increase in the number of farmers
converting to organic farming over time. This is represented by a shift to the right of the supply curve. Since both
demand and supply have shifted to the right, the resulting equilibrium quantity of organic foods is definitely higher,
but the price will only fall when the increase in supply is larger than the increase in demand. We may need more
time before we see lower prices in organic foods. Since the production costs of these foods may remain higher than
conventional farming, because organic fertilizers and pest management techniques are more expensive, they may
never fully catch up with the lower prices of non-organic foods.
As a final, specific example: The Environmental Working Group’s “Dirty Dozen” list of fruits and vegetables, which
test high for pesticide residue even after washing, was released in April 2013. The inclusion of strawberries on the
list led to an increase in demand for organic strawberries, resulting in both a higher equilibrium price and quantity of
sales.
BRING IT HOME
3.5 • Demand, Supply, and Efficiency
77

Key Terms
ceteris paribus other things being equal
complements goods that are often used together so that consumption of one good tends to enhance
consumption of the other
consumer surplus the extra benefit consumers receive from buying a good or service, measured by what the
individuals would have been willing to pay minus the amount that they actually paid
deadweight loss the loss in social surplus that occurs when a market produces an inefficient quantity
demand the relationship between price and the quantity demanded of a certain good or service
demand curve a graphic representation of the relationship between price and quantity demanded of a certain
good or service, with quantity on the horizontal axis and the price on the vertical axis
demand schedule a table that shows a range of prices for a certain good or service and the quantity demanded
at each price
economic surplus see social surplus
equilibrium the situation where quantity demanded is equal to the quantity supplied; the combination of
price and quantity where there is no economic pressure from surpluses or shortages that would cause
price or quantity to change
equilibrium price the price where quantity demanded is equal to quantity supplied
equilibrium quantity the quantity at which quantity demanded and quantity supplied are equal for a certain
price level
excess demand at the existing price, the quantity demanded exceeds the quantity supplied; also called a
shortage
excess supply at the existing price, quantity supplied exceeds the quantity demanded; also called a surplus
factors of production the resources such as labor, materials, and machinery that are used to produce goods
and services; also called inputs
inferior good a good in which the quantity demanded falls as income rises, and in which quantity demanded
rises and income falls
inputs the resources such as labor, materials, and machinery that are used to produce goods and services;
also called factors of production
law of demand the common relationship that a higher price leads to a lower quantity demanded of a certain
good or service and a lower price leads to a higher quantity demanded, while all other variables are held
constant
law of supply the common relationship that a higher price leads to a greater quantity supplied and a lower
price leads to a lower quantity supplied, while all other variables are held constant
normal good a good in which the quantity demanded rises as income rises, and in which quantity demanded
falls as income falls
price what a buyer pays for a unit of the specific good or service
price ceiling a legal maximum price
price control government laws to regulate prices instead of letting market forces determine prices
price floor a legal minimum price
producer surplus the extra benefit producers receive from selling a good or service, measured by the price
the producer actually received minus the price the producer would have been willing to accept
quantity demanded the total number of units of a good or service consumers are willing to purchase at a
given price
quantity supplied the total number of units of a good or service producers are willing to sell at a given price
shift in demand when a change in some economic factor (other than price) causes a different quantity to be
demanded at every price
shift in supply when a change in some economic factor (other than price) causes a different quantity to be
supplied at every price
shortage at the existing price, the quantity demanded exceeds the quantity supplied; also called excess
78
3 • Key Terms
Access for free at openstax.org

demand
social surplus the sum of consumer surplus and producer surplus
substitute a good that can replace another to some extent, so that greater consumption of one good can mean
less of the other
supply the relationship between price and the quantity supplied of a certain good or service
supply curve a line that shows the relationship between price and quantity supplied on a graph, with quantity
supplied on the horizontal axis and price on the vertical axis
supply schedule a table that shows a range of prices for a good or service and the quantity supplied at each
price
surplus at the existing price, quantity supplied exceeds the quantity demanded; also called excess supply
total surplus see social surplus
Key Concepts and Summary
3.1 Demand, Supply, and Equilibrium in Markets for Goods and Services
A demand schedule is a table that shows the quantity demanded at different prices in the market. A demand
curve shows the relationship between quantity demanded and price in a given market on a graph. The law of
demand states that a higher price typically leads to a lower quantity demanded.
A supply schedule is a table that shows the quantity supplied at different prices in the market. A supply curve
shows the relationship between quantity supplied and price on a graph. The law of supply says that a higher
price typically leads to a higher quantity supplied.
The equilibrium price and equilibrium quantity occur where the supply and demand curves cross. The
equilibrium occurs where the quantity demanded is equal to the quantity supplied. If the price is below the
equilibrium level, then the quantity demanded will exceed the quantity supplied. Excess demand or a shortage
will exist. If the price is above the equilibrium level, then the quantity supplied will exceed the quantity
demanded. Excess supply or a surplus will exist. In either case, economic pressures will push the price toward
the equilibrium level.
3.2 Shifts in Demand and Supply for Goods and Services
Economists often use the ceteris paribus or “other things being equal” assumption: while examining the
economic impact of one event, all other factors remain unchanged for analysis purposes. Factors that can shift
the demand curve for goods and services, causing a different quantity to be demanded at any given price,
include changes in tastes, population, income, prices of substitute or complement goods, and expectations
about future conditions and prices. Factors that can shift the supply curve for goods and services, causing a
different quantity to be supplied at any given price, include input prices, natural conditions, changes in
technology, and government taxes, regulations, or subsidies.
3.3 Changes in Equilibrium Price and Quantity: The Four-Step Process
When using the supply and demand framework to think about how an event will affect the equilibrium price
and quantity, proceed through four steps: (1) sketch a supply and demand diagram to think about what the
market looked like before the event; (2) decide whether the event will affect supply or demand; (3) decide
whether the effect on supply or demand is negative or positive, and draw the appropriate shifted supply or
demand curve; (4) compare the new equilibrium price and quantity to the original ones.
3.4 Price Ceilings and Price Floors
Price ceilings prevent a price from rising above a certain level. When a price ceiling is set below the
equilibrium price, quantity demanded will exceed quantity supplied, and excess demand or shortages will
result. Price floors prevent a price from falling below a certain level. When a price floor is set above the
equilibrium price, quantity supplied will exceed quantity demanded, and excess supply or surpluses will
result. Price floors and price ceilings often lead to unintended consequences.
3 • Key Concepts and Summary
79

3.5 Demand, Supply, and Efficiency
Consumer surplus is the gap between the price that consumers are willing to pay, based on their preferences,
and the market equilibrium price. Producer surplus is the gap between the price for which producers are
willing to sell a product, based on their costs, and the market equilibrium price. Social surplus is the sum of
consumer surplus and producer surplus. Total surplus is larger at the equilibrium quantity and price than it
will be at any other quantity and price. Deadweight loss is loss in total surplus that occurs when the economy
produces at an inefficient quantity.
Self-Check Questions
1. Review Figure 3.4. Suppose the price of gasoline is $1.60 per gallon. Is the quantity demanded higher or
lower than at the equilibrium price of $1.40 per gallon? What about the quantity supplied? Is there a
shortage or a surplus in the market? If so, how much?
2. Why do economists use the ceteris paribus assumption?
3. In an analysis of the market for paint, an economist discovers the facts listed below. State whether each of
these changes will affect supply or demand, and in what direction.
a.
There have recently been some important cost-saving inventions in the technology for making paint.
b.
Paint is lasting longer, so that property owners need not repaint as often.
c.
Because of severe hailstorms, many people need to repaint now.
d.
The hailstorms damaged several factories that make paint, forcing them to close down for several
months.
4. Many changes are affecting the market for oil. Predict how each of the following events will affect the
equilibrium price and quantity in the market for oil. In each case, state how the event will affect the supply
and demand diagram. Create a sketch of the diagram if necessary.
a.
Cars are becoming more fuel efficient, and therefore get more miles to the gallon.
b.
The winter is exceptionally cold.
c.
A major discovery of new oil is made off the coast of Norway.
d.
The economies of some major oil-using nations, like Japan, slow down.
e.
A war in the Middle East disrupts oil-pumping schedules.
f.
Landlords install additional insulation in buildings.
g.
The price of solar energy falls dramatically.
h.
Chemical companies invent a new, popular kind of plastic made from oil.
5. Let’s think about the market for air travel. From August 2014 to January 2015, the price of jet fuel
increased roughly 47%. Using the four-step analysis, how do you think this fuel price increase affected the
equilibrium price and quantity of air travel?
6. A tariff is a tax on imported goods. Suppose the U.S. government cuts the tariff on imported flat screen
televisions. Using the four-step analysis, how do you think the tariff reduction will affect the equilibrium
price and quantity of flat screen TVs?
7. What is the effect of a price ceiling on the quantity demanded of the product? What is the effect of a price
ceiling on the quantity supplied? Why exactly does a price ceiling cause a shortage?
8. Does a price ceiling change the equilibrium price?
9. What would be the impact of imposing a price floor below the equilibrium price?
10. Does a price ceiling increase or decrease the number of transactions in a market? Why? What about a
price floor?
11. If a price floor benefits producers, why does a price floor reduce social surplus?
80
3 • Self-Check Questions
Access for free at openstax.org

Review Questions
12. What determines the level of prices in a market?
13. What does a downward-sloping demand curve mean about how buyers in a market will react to a higher
price?
14. Will demand curves have the same exact shape in all markets? If not, how will they differ?
15. Will supply curves have the same shape in all markets? If not, how will they differ?
16. What is the relationship between quantity demanded and quantity supplied at equilibrium? What is the
relationship when there is a shortage? What is the relationship when there is a surplus?
17. How can you locate the equilibrium point on a demand and supply graph?
18. If the price is above the equilibrium level, would you predict a surplus or a shortage? If the price is below
the equilibrium level, would you predict a surplus or a shortage? Why?
19. When the price is above the equilibrium, explain how market forces move the market price to equilibrium.
Do the same when the price is below the equilibrium.
20. What is the difference between the demand and the quantity demanded of a product, say milk? Explain in
words and show the difference on a graph with a demand curve for milk.
21. What is the difference between the supply and the quantity supplied of a product, say milk? Explain in
words and show the difference on a graph with the supply curve for milk.
22. When analyzing a market, how do economists deal with the problem that many factors that affect the
market are changing at the same time?
23. Name some factors that can cause a shift in the demand curve in markets for goods and services.
24. Name some factors that can cause a shift in the supply curve in markets for goods and services.
25. How does one analyze a market where both demand and supply shift?
26. What causes a movement along the demand curve? What causes a movement along the supply curve?
27. Does a price ceiling attempt to make a price higher or lower?
28. How does a price ceiling set below the equilibrium level affect quantity demanded and quantity supplied?
29. Does a price floor attempt to make a price higher or lower?
30. How does a price floor set above the equilibrium level affect quantity demanded and quantity supplied?
31. What is consumer surplus? How is it illustrated on a demand and supply diagram?
32. What is producer surplus? How is it illustrated on a demand and supply diagram?
33. What is total surplus? How is it illustrated on a demand and supply diagram?
34. What is the relationship between total surplus and economic efficiency?
35. What is deadweight loss?
Critical Thinking Questions
36. Review Figure 3.4. Suppose the government decided that, since gasoline is a necessity, its price should be
legally capped at $1.30 per gallon. What do you anticipate would be the outcome in the gasoline market?
37. Explain why the following statement is false: “In the goods market, no buyer would be willing to pay more
than the equilibrium price.”
3 • Review Questions
81

38. Explain why the following statement is false: “In the goods market, no seller would be willing to sell for
less than the equilibrium price.”
39. Consider the demand for hamburgers. If the price of a substitute good (for example, hot dogs) increases
and the price of a complement good (for example, hamburger buns) increases, can you tell for sure what
will happen to the demand for hamburgers? Why or why not? Illustrate your answer with a graph.
40. How do you suppose the demographics of an aging population of “Baby Boomers” in the United States will
affect the demand for milk? Justify your answer.
41. We know that a change in the price of a product causes a movement along the demand curve. Suppose
consumers believe that prices will be rising in the future. How will that affect demand for the product in
the present? Can you show this graphically?
42. Suppose there is a soda tax to curb obesity. What should a reduction in the soda tax do to the supply of
sodas and to the equilibrium price and quantity? Can you show this graphically? Hint: Assume that the
soda tax is collected from the sellers.
43. Use the four-step process to analyze the impact of the advent of the iPod (or other portable digital music
players) on the equilibrium price and quantity of the Sony Walkman (or other portable audio cassette
players).
44. Use the four-step process to analyze the impact of a reduction in tariffs on imports of iPods on the
equilibrium price and quantity of Sony Walkman-type products.
45. Suppose both of these events took place at the same time. Combine your analyses of the impacts of the
iPod and the tariff reduction to determine the likely impact on the equilibrium price and quantity of Sony
Walkman-type products. Show your answer graphically.
46. Most government policy decisions have winners and losers. What are the effects of raising the minimum
wage? It is more complex than simply producers lose and workers gain. Who are the winners and who are
the losers, and what exactly do they win and lose? To what extent does the policy change achieve its goals?
47. Agricultural price supports result in governments holding large inventories of agricultural products. Why
do you think the government cannot simply give the products away to people experiencing poverty?
48. Can you propose a policy that would induce the market to supply more rental housing units?
49. What term would an economist use to describe what happens when a shopper gets a “good deal” on a
product?
50. Explain why voluntary transactions improve social welfare.
51. Why would a free market never operate at a quantity greater than the equilibrium quantity? Hint: What
would be required for a transaction to occur at that quantity?
Problems
52. Review Figure 3.4 again. Suppose the price of gasoline is $1.00. Will the quantity demanded be lower or
higher than at the equilibrium price of $1.40 per gallon? Will the quantity supplied be lower or higher? Is
there a shortage or a surplus in the market? If so, of how much?
82
3 • Problems
Access for free at openstax.org

53. Table 3.8 shows information on the demand and supply for bicycles, where the quantities of bicycles are
measured in thousands.
Price
Qd
Qs
$120
50
36
$150
40
40
$180
32
48
$210
28
56
$240
24
70
TABLE 3.8
a.
What is the quantity demanded and the quantity supplied at a price of $210?
b.
At what price is the quantity supplied equal to 48,000?
c.
Graph the demand and supply curve for bicycles. How can you determine the equilibrium price and
quantity from the graph? How can you determine the equilibrium price and quantity from the table?
What are the equilibrium price and equilibrium quantity?
d.
If the price was $120, what would the quantities demanded and supplied be? Would a shortage or
surplus exist? If so, how large would the shortage or surplus be?
54. The computer market in recent years has seen many more computers sell at much lower prices. What
shift in demand or supply is most likely to explain this outcome? Sketch a demand and supply diagram
and explain your reasoning for each.
a.
A rise in demand
b.
A fall in demand
c.
A rise in supply
d.
A fall in supply
3 • Problems
83

55. Table 3.9 illustrates the market's demand and supply for cheddar cheese. Graph the data and find the
equilibrium. Next, create a table showing the change in quantity demanded or quantity supplied, and a
graph of the new equilibrium, in each of the following situations:
a.
The price of milk, a key input for cheese production, rises, so that the supply decreases by 80 pounds
at every price.
b.
A new study says that eating cheese is good for your health, so that demand increases by 20% at every
price.
Price per Pound
Qd
Qs
$3.00
750
540
$3.20
700
600
$3.40
650
650
$3.60
620
700
$3.80
600
720
$4.00
590
730
TABLE 3.9
56. Table 3.10 shows the supply and demand for movie tickets in a city. Graph demand and supply and
identify the equilibrium. Then calculate in a table and graph the effect of the following two changes.
a.
Three new nightclubs open. They offer decent bands and have no cover charge, but make their money
by selling food and drink. As a result, demand for movie tickets falls by six units at every price.
b.
The city eliminates a tax that it placed on all local entertainment businesses. The result is that the
quantity supplied of movies at any given price increases by 10%.
Price per Ticket
Qd
Qs
$5.00
26
16
$6.00
24
18
$7.00
22
20
$8.00
21
21
$9.00
20
22
TABLE 3.10
84
3 • Problems
Access for free at openstax.org

57. A low-income country decides to set a price ceiling on bread so it can make sure that bread is affordable to
the poor. Table 3.11 provides the conditions of demand and supply. What are the equilibrium price and
equilibrium quantity before the price ceiling? What will the excess demand or the shortage (that is,
quantity demanded minus quantity supplied) be if the price ceiling is set at $2.40? At $2.00? At $3.60?
Price
Qd
Qs
$1.60
9,000
5,000
$2.00
8,500
5,500
$2.40
8,000
6,400
$2.80
7,500
7,500
$3.20
7,000
9,000
$3.60
6,500
11,000
$4.00
6,000
15,000
TABLE 3.11
3 • Problems
85

86
3 • Problems
Access for free at openstax.org


FIGURE 8.1 Depending on the competition and prices offered, a soybean farmer may choose to grow a different
crop. (Credit: modification “Agronomist & Farmer Inspecting Weeds” by United Soybean Board/Flickr, CC BY 2.0)
CHAPTER OBJECTIVES
In this chapter, you will learn about:
•
Perfect Competition and Why It Matters
•
How Perfectly Competitive Firms Make Output Decisions
•
Entry and Exit Decisions in the Long Run
•
Efficiency in Perfectly Competitive Markets
Introduction to Perfect Competition
A Dime a Dozen
When you were younger did you babysit, deliver papers, or mow the lawn for money? If so, you faced stiff
competition from many other competitors who offered identical services. There was nothing to stop others from
also offering their services.
All of you charged the “going rate.” If you tried to charge more, your customers would simply buy from someone
else. These conditions are very similar to the conditions agricultural growers face.
8
Perfect Competition
BRING IT HOME

Growing a crop may be more difficult to start than a babysitting or lawn mowing service, but growers face the same
fierce competition. In the grand scale of world agriculture, farmers face competition from thousands of others
because they sell an identical product. After all, winter wheat is winter wheat, but if they find it hard to make money
with that crop, it is relatively easy for farmers to leave the marketplace for another crop. In this case, they do not sell
the family farm, they switch crops.
Take the case of the upper Midwest region of the United States—for many generations the area was called “King
Wheat.” According to the United States Department of Agriculture National Agricultural Statistics Service, statistics
by state, in 1997, 11.6 million acres of wheat and 780,000 acres of corn were planted in North Dakota. In the
intervening 25 or so years has the mix of crops changed? Since it is relatively easy to switch crops, did farmers
change what they planted in response to changes in relative crop prices? We will find out at chapter’s end.
In the meantime, let's consider the topic of this chapter—the perfectly competitive market. This is a market in which
entry and exit are relatively easy and competitors are “a dime a dozen.”
Most businesses face two realities: no one is required to buy their products, and even customers who might
want those products may buy from other businesses instead. Firms that operate in perfectly competitive
markets face this reality. In this chapter, you will learn how such firms make decisions about how much to
produce, how much profit they make, whether to stay in business or not, and many others. Industries differ
from one another in terms of how many sellers there are in a specific market, how easy or difficult it is for a
new firm to enter, and the type of products that they sell. Economists refer to this as an industry's market
structure. In this chapter, we focus on perfect competition. However, in other chapters we will examine other
industry types: Monopoly and Monopolistic Competition and Oligopoly.
8.1 Perfect Competition and Why It Matters
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
•
Explain the characteristics of a perfectly competitive market
•
Discuss how perfectly competitive firms react in the short run and in the long run
Firms are in perfect competition when the following conditions occur: (1) many firms produce identical
products; (2) many buyers are available to buy the product, and many sellers are available to sell the product;
(3) sellers and buyers have all relevant information to make rational decisions about the product that they are
buying and selling; and (4) firms can enter and leave the market without any restrictions—in other words, there
is free entry and exit into and out of the market.
A perfectly competitive firm is known as a price taker, because the pressure of competing firms forces it to
accept the prevailing equilibrium price in the market. If a firm in a perfectly competitive market raises the
price of its product by so much as a penny, it will lose all of its sales to competitors. When a wheat grower, as
we discussed in the Bring It Home feature, wants to know the going price of wheat, they have to check on the
computer or listen to the radio. Supply and demand in the entire market solely determine the market price, not
the individual farmer. A perfectly competitive firm must be a very small player in the overall market, so that it
can increase or decrease output without noticeably affecting the overall quantity supplied and price in the
market.
A perfectly competitive market is a hypothetical extreme; however, producers in a number of industries do
face many competitor firms selling highly similar goods, in which case they must often act as price takers.
Economists often use agricultural markets as an example. The same crops that different farmers grow are
largely interchangeable. According to the United States Department of Agriculture monthly reports, in
December 2021, U.S. corn farmers received an average of $5.47 per bushel. A corn farmer who attempted to
sell at $6.00 per bushel would not have found any buyers. A perfectly competitive firm will not sell below the
equilibrium price either. Why should they when they can sell all they want at the higher price? Other examples
188
8 • Perfect Competition
Access for free at openstax.org

of agricultural markets that operate in close to perfectly competitive markets are small roadside produce
markets and small organic farmers.
LINK IT UP
Visit this website (http://openstax.org/l/commodities) that reveals the current value of various commodities.
This chapter examines how profit-seeking firms decide how much to produce in perfectly competitive
markets. Such firms will analyze their costs as we discussed in the chapter on Production, Costs and Industry
Structure. In the short run, the perfectly competitive firm will seek the quantity of output where profits are
highest or, if profits are not possible, where losses are lowest.
In the long run, positive economic profits will attract competition as other firms enter the market. Economic
losses will cause firms to exit the market. Ultimately, perfectly competitive markets will attain long-run
equilibrium when no new firms want to enter the market and existing firms do not want to leave the market, as
economic profits have been driven down to zero.
8.2 How Perfectly Competitive Firms Make Output Decisions
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
•
Calculate profits by comparing total revenue and total cost
•
Identify profits and losses with the average cost curve
•
Explain the shutdown point
•
Determine the price at which a firm should continue producing in the short run
A perfectly competitive firm has only one major decision to make—namely, what quantity to produce. To
understand this, consider a different way of writing out the basic definition of profit:
Since a perfectly competitive firm must accept the price for its output as determined by the product’s market
demand and supply, it cannot choose the price it charges. This is already determined in the profit equation,
and so the perfectly competitive firm can sell any number of units at exactly the same price. It implies that the
firm faces a perfectly elastic demand curve for its product: buyers are willing to buy any number of units of
output from the firm at the market price. When the perfectly competitive firm chooses what quantity to
produce, then this quantity—along with the prices prevailing in the market for output and inputs—will
determine the firm’s total revenue, total costs, and ultimately, level of profits.
Determining the Highest Profit by Comparing Total Revenue and Total Cost
A perfectly competitive firm can sell as large a quantity as it wishes, as long as it accepts the prevailing market
price. The formula above shows that total revenue depends on the quantity sold and the price charged. If the
firm sells a higher quantity of output, then total revenue will increase. If the market price of the product
increases, then total revenue also increases whatever the quantity of output sold. As an example of how a
perfectly competitive firm decides what quantity to produce, consider the case of a small farmer who produces
raspberries and sells them frozen for $4 per pack. Sales of one pack of raspberries will bring in $4, two packs
will be $8, three packs will be $12, and so on. If, for example, the price of frozen raspberries doubles to $8 per
pack, then sales of one pack of raspberries will be $8, two packs will be $16, three packs will be $24, and so on.
Table 8.1 shows total revenue and total costs for the raspberry farm; these data also appear in Figure 8.2. The
horizontal axis shows the quantity of frozen raspberries produced in packs. The vertical axis shows both total
revenue and total costs, measured in dollars. The total cost curve intersects with the vertical axis at a value
that shows the level of fixed costs, and then slopes upward. All these cost curves follow the same
8.2 • How Perfectly Competitive Firms Make Output Decisions
189

characteristics as the curves that we covered in the Production, Costs and Industry Structure chapter.
FIGURE 8.2 Total Cost and Total Revenue at the Raspberry Farm Total revenue for a perfectly competitive firm is a
straight line sloping up. The slope is equal to the price of the good. Total cost also slopes up, but with some
curvature. At higher levels of output, total cost begins to slope upward more steeply because of diminishing
marginal returns. The maximum profit will occur at the quantity where the difference between total revenue and
total cost is largest.
Quantity
(Q)
Total Cost
(TC)
Total Revenue
(TR)
Profit
0
$62
$0
−$62
10
$90
$40
−$50
20
$110
$80
−$30
30
$126
$120
−$6
40
$138
$160
$22
50
$150
$200
$50
60
$165
$240
$75
70
$190
$280
$90
80
$230
$320
$90
90
$296
$360
$64
100
$400
$400
$0
110
$550
$440
$−110
120
$715
$480
$−235
TABLE 8.1 Total Cost and Total Revenue at the
Raspberry Farm
Based on its total revenue and total cost curves, a perfectly competitive firm like the raspberry farm can
190
8 • Perfect Competition
Access for free at openstax.org

calculate the quantity of output that will provide the highest level of profit. At any given quantity, total revenue
minus total cost will equal profit. One way to determine the most profitable quantity to produce is to see at
what quantity total revenue exceeds total cost by the largest amount. Figure 8.2 shows total revenue, total cost
and profit using the data from Table 8.1. The vertical gap between total revenue and total cost is profit, for
example, at Q = 60, TR = 240 and TC = 165. The difference is 75, which is the height of the profit curve at that
output level. The firm doesn’t make a profit at every level of output. In this example, total costs will exceed total
revenues at output levels from 0 to approximately 30, and so over this range of output, the firm will be making
losses. At output levels from 40 to 100, total revenues exceed total costs, so the firm is earning profits.
However, at any output greater than 100, total costs again exceed total revenues and the firm is making
increasing losses. Total profits appear in the final column of Table 8.1. Maximum profit occurs at an output
between 70 and 80, when profit equals $90.
A higher price would mean that total revenue would be higher for every quantity sold. A lower price would
mean that total revenue would be lower for every quantity sold. What happens if the price drops low enough so
that the total revenue line is completely below the total cost curve; that is, at every level of output, total costs
are higher than total revenues? In this instance, the best the firm can do is to suffer losses. However, a profit-
maximizing firm will prefer the quantity of output where total revenues come closest to total costs and thus
where the losses are smallest.
(Later we will see that sometimes it will make sense for the firm to close, rather than stay in operation
producing output.)
Comparing Marginal Revenue and Marginal Costs
The approach that we described in the previous section, using total revenue and total cost, is not the only
approach to determining the profit maximizing level of output. In this section, we provide an alternative
approach which uses marginal revenue and marginal cost.
Firms often do not have the necessary data they need to draw a complete total cost curve for all levels of
production. They cannot be sure of what total costs would look like if they, say, doubled production or cut
production in half, because they have not tried it. Instead, firms experiment. They produce a slightly greater or
lower quantity and observe how it affects profits. In economic terms, this practical approach to maximizing
profits means examining how changes in production affect marginal revenue and marginal cost.
Figure 8.3 presents the marginal revenue and marginal cost curves based on the total revenue and total cost in
Table 8.1. The marginal revenue curve shows the additional revenue gained from selling one more unit. As
mentioned before, a firm in perfect competition faces a perfectly elastic demand curve for its product—that is,
the firm’s demand curve is a horizontal line drawn at the market price level. This also means that the firm’s
marginal revenue curve is the same as the firm’s demand curve: Every time a consumer demands one more
unit, the firm sells one more unit and revenue increases by exactly the same amount equal to the market price.
In this example, every time the firm sells a pack of frozen raspberries, the firm’s revenue increases by $4.
Table 8.2 shows an example of this. This condition only holds for price taking firms in perfect competition
where:
The formula for marginal revenue is:
8.2 • How Perfectly Competitive Firms Make Output Decisions
191

Price
Quantity
Total Revenue
Marginal Revenue
$4
1
$4
-
$4
2
$8
$4
$4
3
$12
$4
$4
4
$16
$4
TABLE 8.2
Notice that marginal revenue does not change as the firm produces more output. That is because under
perfect competition, the price is determined through the interaction of supply and demand in the market and
does not change as the farmer produces more (keeping in mind that, due to the relative small size of each firm,
increasing their supply has no impact on the total market supply where price is determined).
Since a perfectly competitive firm is a price taker, it can sell whatever quantity it wishes at the market-
determined price. We calculate marginal cost, the cost per additional unit sold, by dividing the change in total
cost by the change in quantity. The formula for marginal cost is:
Ordinarily, marginal cost changes as the firm produces a greater quantity.
In the raspberry farm example, in Figure 8.3 and Table 8.3, marginal cost at first declines as production
increases from 10 to 20 to 30 to 40 packs of raspberries—which represents the area of increasing marginal
returns that is not uncommon at low levels of production. At some point, though, marginal costs start to
increase, displaying the typical pattern of diminishing marginal returns. If the firm is producing at a quantity
where MR > MC, like 40 or 50 packs of raspberries, then it can increase profit by increasing output because the
marginal revenue is exceeding the marginal cost. If the firm is producing at a quantity where MC > MR, like 90
or 100 packs, then it can increase profit by reducing output because the reductions in marginal cost will
exceed the reductions in marginal revenue. The firm’s profit-maximizing choice of output will occur where MR
= MC (or at a choice close to that point).
FIGURE 8.3 Marginal Revenues and Marginal Costs at the Raspberry Farm: Individual Farmer For a perfectly
competitive firm, the marginal revenue (MR) curve is a horizontal line because it is equal to the price of the good,
which is determined by the market, as Figure 8.4 illustrates. The marginal cost (MC) curve is sometimes initially
192
8 • Perfect Competition
Access for free at openstax.org

downward-sloping, if there is a region of increasing marginal returns at low levels of output, but is eventually
upward-sloping at higher levels of output as diminishing marginal returns kick in.
FIGURE 8.4 Supply, Demand, and Equilibrium Price in the Market for Raspberries The equilibrium price of
raspberries is determined through the interaction of market supply and market demand at $4.00.
Quantity
Total Cost
Marginal Cost
Total Revenue
Marginal Revenue
Profit
0
$62
-
$0
$4
-$62
10
$90
$2.80
$40
$4
-$50
20
$110
$2.00
$80
$4
-$30
30
$126
$1.60
$120
$4
-$6
40
$138
$1.20
$160
$4
$22
50
$150
$1.20
$200
$4
$50
60
$165
$1.50
$240
$4
$75
70
$190
$2.50
$280
$4
$90
80
$230
$4.00
$320
$4
$90
90
$296
$6.60
$360
$4
$64
100
$400
$10.40
$400
$4
$0
110
$550
$15.00
$440
$4
-$110
120
$715
$16.50
$480
$4
-$235
TABLE 8.3 Marginal Revenues and Marginal Costs at the Raspberry Farm
In this example, the marginal revenue and marginal cost curves cross at a price of $4 and a quantity of 80
produced. If the farmer started out producing at a level of 60, and then experimented with increasing
production to 70, marginal revenues from the increase in production would exceed marginal costs—and so
profits would rise. The farmer has an incentive to keep producing. At a level of output of 80, marginal cost and
8.2 • How Perfectly Competitive Firms Make Output Decisions
193

marginal revenue are equal so profit doesn’t change. If the farmer then experimented further with increasing
production from 80 to 90, he would find that marginal costs from the increase in production are greater than
marginal revenues, and so profits would decline.
The profit-maximizing choice for a perfectly competitive firm will occur at the level of output where marginal
revenue is equal to marginal cost—that is, where MR = MC. This occurs at Q = 80 in the figure.
Does Profit Maximization Occur at a Range of Output or a Specific Level of Output?
Table 8.1 shows that maximum profit occurs at any output level between 70 and 80 units of output. But MR = MC
occurs only at 80 units of output. How can we explain this slight discrepancy? As long as MR > MC, a profit-
seeking firm should keep expanding production. Expanding production into the zone where MR < MC reduces
economic profits. It’s true that profit is the same at Q = 70 and Q = 80, but it’s only when the firm goes beyond
that Q that it will see that profits fall. Thus, MR = MC is the signal to stop expanding, so that is the level of output
they should target.
Because the marginal revenue received by a perfectly competitive firm is equal to the price P, we can also write
the profit-maximizing rule for a perfectly competitive firm as a recommendation to produce at the quantity of
output where P = MC.
Profits and Losses with the Average Cost Curve
Does maximizing profit (producing where MR = MC) imply an actual economic profit? The answer depends on
the relationship between price and average total cost, which is the average profit or profit margin. If the
market price is higher than the firm's average cost of production for that quantity produced, then the profit
margin is positive and the firm will earn profits. Conversely, if the market price is lower than the average cost
of production, the profit margin is negative and the firm will suffer losses. You might think that, in this
situation, the firm may want to shut down immediately. Remember, however, that the firm has already paid for
fixed costs, such as equipment, so it may continue to produce for a while and incur a loss. Table 8.3 continues
the raspberry farm example. Figure 8.5 illustrates the three possible scenarios: (a) where price intersects
marginal cost at a level above the average cost curve, (b) where price intersects marginal cost at a level equal to
the average cost curve, and (c) where price intersects marginal cost at a level below the average cost curve.
WORK IT OUT
194
8 • Perfect Competition
Access for free at openstax.org

FIGURE 8.5 Price and Average Cost at the Raspberry Farm In (a), price intersects marginal cost above the average
cost curve. Since price is greater than average cost, the firm is making a profit. In (b), price intersects marginal cost
at the minimum point of the average cost curve. Since price is equal to average cost, the firm is breaking even. In (c),
price intersects marginal cost below the average cost curve. Since price is less than average cost, the firm is making
a loss.
First consider a situation where the price is equal to $5 for a pack of frozen raspberries. The rule for a profit-
maximizing perfectly competitive firm is to produce the level of output where Price= MR = MC, so the
raspberry farmer will produce a quantity of approximately 85, which is labeled as E' in Figure 8.5 (a).
Remember that the area of a rectangle is equal to its base multiplied by its height. The farm’s total revenue at
this price will be shown by the rectangle from the origin over to a quantity of 85 packs (the base) up to point E'
(the height), over to the price of $5, and back to the origin. The average cost of producing 80 packs is shown by
point C or about $3.50. Total costs will be the quantity of 85 times the average cost of $3.50, which is shown by
the area of the rectangle from the origin to a quantity of 90, up to point C, over to the vertical axis and down to
the origin. The difference between total revenues and total costs is profits. Thus, profits will be the blue shaded
rectangle on top.
We calculate this as:
8.2 • How Perfectly Competitive Firms Make Output Decisions
195

Or, we can calculate it as:
Now consider Figure 8.5 (b), where the price has fallen to $2.75 for a pack of frozen raspberries. Again, the
perfectly competitive firm will choose the level of output where Price = MR = MC, but in this case, the quantity
produced will be 75. At this price and output level, where the marginal cost curve is crossing the average cost
curve, the price the firm receives is exactly equal to its average cost of production. We call this the break even
point.
The farm’s total revenue at this price will be shown by the large shaded rectangle from the origin over to a
quantity of 75 packs (the base) up to point E (the height), over to the price of $2.75, and back to the origin. The
height of the average cost curve at Q = 75, i.e. point E, shows the average cost of producing this quantity. Total
costs will be the quantity of 75 times the average cost of $2.75, which is shown by the area of the rectangle
from the origin to a quantity of 75, up to point E, over to the vertical axis and down to the origin. It should be
clear that the rectangles for total revenue and total cost are the same. Thus, the firm is making zero profit. The
calculations are as follows:
Or, we can calculate it as:
In Figure 8.5 (c), the market price has fallen still further to $2.00 for a pack of frozen raspberries. At this price,
marginal revenue intersects marginal cost at a quantity of 65. The farm’s total revenue at this price will be
shown by the large shaded rectangle from the origin over to a quantity of 65 packs (the base) up to point E” (the
height), over to the price of $2, and back to the origin. The average cost of producing 65 packs is shown by
Point C” or shows the average cost of producing 50 packs is about $2.73. Total costs will be the quantity of 65
times the average cost of $2.73, which the area of the rectangle from the origin to a quantity of 50, up to point
C”, over to the vertical axis and down to the origin shows. It should be clear from examining the two rectangles
that total revenue is less than total cost. Thus, the firm is losing money and the loss (or negative profit) will be
the rose-shaded rectangle.
The calculations are:
Or:
196
8 • Perfect Competition
Access for free at openstax.org

If the market price that perfectly competitive firm receives leads it to produce at a quantity where the price is
greater than average cost, the firm will earn profits. If the price the firm receives causes it to produce at a
quantity where price equals average cost, which occurs at the minimum point of the AC curve, then the firm
earns zero profits. Finally, if the price the firm receives leads it to produce at a quantity where the price is less
than average cost, the firm will earn losses. Table 8.4 summarizes this.
If...
Then...
Price > ATC
Firm earns an economic profit
Price = ATC
Firm earns zero economic profit
Price < ATC
Firm earns a loss
TABLE 8.4
Which intersection should a firm choose?
At a price of $2, MR intersects MC at two points: Q = 20 and Q = 65. It never makes sense for a firm to choose a level
of output on the downward sloping part of the MC curve, because the profit is lower (the loss is bigger). Thus, the
correct choice of output is Q = 65.
The Shutdown Point
The possibility that a firm may earn losses raises a question: Why can the firm not avoid losses by shutting
down and not producing at all? The answer is that shutting down can reduce variable costs to zero, but in the
short run, the firm has already paid for fixed costs. As a result, if the firm produces a quantity of zero, it would
still make losses because it would still need to pay for its fixed costs. Therefore when a firm is experiencing
losses, it must face a question: should it continue producing or should it shut down?
As an example, consider the situation of the Yoga Center, which has signed a contract to rent space that costs
$10,000 per month. If the firm decides to operate, its marginal costs for hiring yoga teachers is $15,000 for the
month. If the firm shuts down, it must still pay the rent, but it would not need to hire labor. Table 8.5 shows
three possible scenarios. In the first scenario, the Yoga Center does not have any clients, and therefore does not
make any revenues, in which case it faces losses of $10,000 equal to the fixed costs. In the second scenario, the
Yoga Center has clients that earn the center revenues of $10,000 for the month, but ultimately experiences
losses of $15,000 due to having to hire yoga instructors to cover the classes. In the third scenario, the Yoga
Center earns revenues of $20,000 for the month, but experiences losses of $5,000.
In all three cases, the Yoga Center loses money. In all three cases, when the rental contract expires in the long
run, assuming revenues do not improve, the firm should exit this business. In the short run, though, the
decision varies depending on the level of losses and whether the firm can cover its variable costs. In scenario 1,
the center does not have any revenues, so hiring yoga teachers would increase variable costs and losses, so it
should shut down and only incur its fixed costs. In scenario 2, the center’s losses are greater because it does
not make enough revenue to offset the increased variable costs, so it should shut down immediately and only
incur its fixed costs. If price is below the minimum average variable cost, the firm must shut down. In contrast,
in scenario 3 the revenue that the center can earn is high enough that the losses diminish when it remains
open, so the center should remain open in the short run.
CLEAR IT UP
8.2 • How Perfectly Competitive Firms Make Output Decisions
197

Scenario 1
If the center shuts down now, revenues are zero but it will not incur any variable costs and would only need to pay
fixed costs of $10,000.
Scenario 2
The center earns revenues of $10,000, and variable costs are $15,000. The center should shut down now.
Scenario 3
The center earns revenues of $20,000, and variable costs are $15,000. The center should continue in business.
TABLE 8.5 Should the Yoga Center Shut Down Now or Later?
Figure 8.6 illustrates the lesson that remaining open requires the price to exceed the firm’s average variable
cost. When the firm is operating below the break-even point, where price equals average cost, it is operating at
a loss so it faces two options: continue to produce and lose money or shutdown. Which option is preferable?
The one that loses the least money is the best choice.
At a price of $2.00 per pack, as Figure 8.6 (a) illustrates, if the farm stays in operation it will produce at a level
of 65 packs of raspberries, and it will make losses of $47.45 (as explained earlier). The alternative would be to
shut down and lose all the fixed costs of $62.00. Since losing $47.45 is preferable to losing $62.00, the profit
maximizing (or in this case the loss minimizing) choice is to stay in operation. The key reason is because price
is above average variable cost. This means that at the current price the farm can pay all its variable costs, and
have some revenue left over to pay some of the fixed costs. So the loss represents the part of the fixed costs the
farm can’t pay, which is less than the entire fixed costs. However, if the price declined to $1.50 per pack, as
Figure 8.6 (b) shows, and if the firm applied its rule of producing where P = MR = MC, it would produce a
quantity of 60. This price is below average variable cost for this level of output. If the farmer cannot pay
workers (the variable costs), then it has to shut down. At this price and output, total revenues would be $90
(quantity of 60 times price of $1.50) and total cost would be $165, for overall losses of $75. If the farm shuts
down, it must pay only its fixed costs of $62, so shutting down is preferable to selling at a price of $1.50 per
pack.
198
8 • Perfect Competition
Access for free at openstax.org

FIGURE 8.6 The Shutdown Point for the Raspberry Farm In (a), the farm produces at a level of 65. It is making
losses of $47.50, but price is above average variable cost, so it continues to operate. In (b), total revenues are $90
and total cost is $165, for overall losses of $75. If the farm shuts down, it must pay only its fixed costs of $62.
Shutting down is preferable to selling at a price of $1.50 per pack.
Looking at Table 8.6, if the price falls below about $1.72, the minimum average variable cost, the firm must
shut down.
Quantity
Q
Average Variable Cost
AVC
Average Cost
AC
Marginal Cost
MC
0
-
-
-
10
$2.80
$9.00
$2.80
20
$2.40
$5.50
$2.00
30
$2.13
$4.20
$1.60
40
$1.90
$3.45
$1.20
50
$1.76
$3.00
$1.20
60
$1.72
$2.75
$1.50
70
$1.83
$2.71
$2.50
80
$2.10
$2.88
$4.00
90
$2.60
$3.29
$6.60
100
$3.38
$4.00
$10.40
110
$4.44
$5.00
$15.00
120
$5.44
$5.96
$31.50
TABLE 8.6 Cost of Production for the Raspberry Farm
8.2 • How Perfectly Competitive Firms Make Output Decisions
199

The intersection of the average variable cost curve and the marginal cost curve, which shows the price below
which the firm would lack enough revenue to cover its variable costs, is called the shutdown point. If the
perfectly competitive firm faces a market price above the shutdown point, then the firm is at least covering its
average variable costs. At a price above the shutdown point, the firm is also making enough revenue to cover at
least a portion of fixed costs, so it should limp ahead even if it is making losses in the short run, since at least
those losses will be smaller than if the firm shuts down immediately and incurs a loss equal to total fixed costs.
However, if the firm is receiving a price below the price at the shutdown point, then the firm is not even
covering its variable costs. In this case, staying open is making the firm’s losses larger, and it should shut down
immediately. To summarize, if:
•
price < minimum average variable cost, then firm shuts down
•
price > minimum average variable cost, then firm stays in business
Short-Run Outcomes for Perfectly Competitive Firms
The average cost and average variable cost curves divide the marginal cost curve into three segments, as
Figure 8.7 shows. At the market price, which the perfectly competitive firm accepts as given, the profit-
maximizing firm chooses the output level where price or marginal revenue, which are the same thing for a
perfectly competitive firm, is equal to marginal cost: P = MR = MC.
FIGURE 8.7 Profit, Loss, Shutdown We can divide the marginal cost curve into three zones, based on where it is
crossed by the average cost and average variable cost curves. We call the point where MC crosses AC the break even
point. If the firm is operating where the market price is at a level higher than the break even point, then price will be
greater than average cost and the firm is earning profits. If the price is exactly at the break even point, then the firm
is making zero profits. If price falls in the zone between the shutdown point and the break even point, then the firm
is making losses but will continue to operate in the short run, since it is covering its variable costs, and more if price
is above the shutdown-point price. However, if price falls below the price at the shutdown point, then the firm will
shut down immediately, since it is not even covering its variable costs.
First consider the upper zone, where prices are above the level where marginal cost (MC) crosses average cost
(AC) at the zero profit point. At any price above that level, the firm will earn profits in the short run. If the price
falls exactly on the break even point where the MC and AC curves cross, then the firm earns zero profits. If a
price falls into the zone between the break even point, where MC crosses AC, and the shutdown point, where
MC crosses AVC, the firm will be making losses in the short run—but since the firm is more than covering its
200
8 • Perfect Competition
Access for free at openstax.org

variable costs, the losses are smaller than if the firm shut down immediately. Finally, consider a price at or
below the shutdown point where MC crosses AVC. At any price like this one, the firm will shut down
immediately, because it cannot even cover its variable costs.
Marginal Cost and the Firm’s Supply Curve
For a perfectly competitive firm, the marginal cost curve is identical to the firm’s supply curve starting from
the minimum point on the average variable cost curve. To understand why this perhaps surprising insight
holds true, first think about what the supply curve means. A firm checks the market price and then looks at its
supply curve to decide what quantity to produce. Now, think about what it means to say that a firm will
maximize its profits by producing at the quantity where P = MC. This rule means that the firm checks the
market price, and then looks at its marginal cost to determine the quantity to produce—and makes sure that
the price is greater than the minimum average variable cost. In other words, the marginal cost curve above the
minimum point on the average variable cost curve becomes the firm’s supply curve.
LINK IT UP
Watch this video (http://openstax.org/l/foodprice) that addresses how drought in the United States can impact
food prices across the world.
As we discussed in the chapter on Demand and Supply, many of the reasons that supply curves shift relate to
underlying changes in costs. For example, a lower price of key inputs or new technologies that reduce
production costs cause supply to shift to the right. In contrast, bad weather or added government regulations
can add to costs of certain goods in a way that causes supply to shift to the left. We can also interpret these
shifts in the firm’s supply curve as shifts of the marginal cost curve. A shift in costs of production that
increases marginal costs at all levels of output—and shifts MC upward and to the left—will cause a perfectly
competitive firm to produce less at any given market price. Conversely, a shift in costs of production that
decreases marginal costs at all levels of output will shift MC downward and to the right and as a result, a
competitive firm will choose to expand its level of output at any given price. The following Work It Out feature
will walk you through an example.
At What Price Should the Firm Continue Producing in the Short Run?
To determine the short-run economic condition of a firm in perfect competition, follow the steps outlined below.
Use the data in Table 8.7.
Q
P
TFC
TVC
TC
AVC
ATC
MC
TR
Profits
0
$28
$20
$0
-
-
-
-
-
-
1
$28
$20
$20
-
-
-
-
-
-
2
$28
$20
$25
-
-
-
-
-
-
3
$28
$20
$35
-
-
-
-
-
-
4
$28
$20
$52
-
-
-
-
-
-
5
$28
$20
$80
-
-
-
-
-
-
TABLE 8.7
WORK IT OUT
8.2 • How Perfectly Competitive Firms Make Output Decisions
201

Step 1. Determine the cost structure for the firm. For a given total fixed costs and variable costs, calculate total
cost, average variable cost, average total cost, and marginal cost. Follow the formulas given in the Production,
Costs, and Industry Structure chapter. These calculations are in Table 8.8.
Q
P
TFC
TVC
TC
(TFC+TVC)
AVC
(TVC/Q)
ATC
(TC/Q)
MC
(TC2−TC1)/
(Q2−Q1)
0
$28
$20
$0
$20+$0=$20
-
-
-
1
$28
$20
$20
$20+$20=$40
$20/1=$20.00
$40/1=$40.00
($40−$20)/
(1−0)= $20
2
$28
$20
$25
$20+$25=$45
$25/2=$12.50
$45/2=$22.50
($45−$40)/
(2−1)= $5
3
$28
$20
$35
$20+$35=$55
$35/3=$11.67
$55/3=$18.33
($55−$45)/
(3−2)= $10
4
$28
$20
$52
$20+$52=$72
$52/4=$13.00
$72/4=$18.00
($72−$55)/
(4−3)= $17
5
$28
$20
$80
$20+$80=$100
$80/5=$16.00
$100/5=$20.00
($100−$72)/
(5−4)= $28
TABLE 8.8
Step 2. Determine the market price that the firm receives for its product. Since the firm in perfect competition
is a price taker, the market price is constant. With the given price, calculate total revenue as equal to price
multiplied by quantity for all output levels produced. In this example, the given price is $28. You can see that in
the second column of Table 8.9.
Quantity
Price
Total Revenue (P × Q)
0
$28
$28×0=$0
1
$28
$28×1=$28
2
$28
$28×2=$56
3
$28
$28×3=$84
4
$28
$28×4=$112
5
$28
$28×5=$140
TABLE 8.9
Step 3. Calculate profits as total cost subtracted from total revenue, as Table 8.10 shows.
202
8 • Perfect Competition
Access for free at openstax.org

Quantity
Total Revenue
Total Cost
Profits (TR−TC)
0
$0
$20
$0−$20=−$20
1
$28
$40
$28−$40=−$12
2
$56
$45
$56−$45=$11
3
$84
$55
$84−$55=$29
4
$112
$72
$112−$72=$40
5
$140
$100
$140−$100=$40
TABLE 8.10
Step 4. To find the profit-maximizing output level, look at the Marginal Cost column (at every output level
produced), as Table 8.11 shows, and determine where it is equal to the market price. The output level where
price equals the marginal cost is the output level that maximizes profits.
Q
P
TFC
TVC
TC
AVC
ATC
MC
TR
Profits
0
$28
$20
$0
$20
-
-
-
$0
−$20
1
$28
$20
$20
$40
$20.00
$40.00
$20
$28
−$12
2
$28
$20
$25
$45
$12.50
$22.50
$5
$56
$11
3
$28
$20
$35
$55
$11.67
$18.33
$10
$84
$29
4
$28
$20
$52
$72
$13.00
$18.00
$17
$112
$40
5
$28
$20
$80
$100
$16.40
$20.40
$28
$140
$40
TABLE 8.11
Step 5. Once you have determined the profit-maximizing output level (in this case, output quantity 5), you can
look at the amount of profits made (in this case, $40).
Step 6. If the firm is making economic losses, the firm needs to determine whether it produces the output level
where price equals marginal revenue and equals marginal cost or it shuts down and only incurs its fixed costs.
Step 7. For the output level where marginal revenue is equal to marginal cost, check if the market price is
greater than the average variable cost of producing that output level.
•
If P > AVC but P < ATC, then the firm continues to produce in the short-run, making economic losses.
•
If P < AVC, then the firm stops producing and only incurs its fixed costs.
In this example, the price of $28 is greater than the AVC ($16.40) of producing 5 units of output, so the firm
continues producing.
8.2 • How Perfectly Competitive Firms Make Output Decisions
203

8.3 Entry and Exit Decisions in the Long Run
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
•
Explain how entry and exit lead to zero profits in the long run
•
Discuss the long-run adjustment process
It is impossible to precisely define the line between the short run and the long run with a stopwatch, or even
with a calendar. It varies according to the specific business. Therefore, the distinction between the short run
and the long run is more technical: in the short run, firms cannot change the usage of fixed inputs, while in the
long run, the firm can adjust all factors of production.
In a competitive market, profits are a red cape that incites businesses to charge. If a business is making a profit
in the short run, it has an incentive to expand existing factories or to build new ones. New firms may start
production, as well. When new firms enter the industry in response to increased industry profits it is called
entry.
Losses are the black thundercloud that causes businesses to flee. If a business is making losses in the short
run, it will either keep limping along or just shut down, depending on whether its revenues are covering its
variable costs. But in the long run, firms that are facing losses will cease production altogether. The long-run
process of reducing production in response to a sustained pattern of losses is called exit. The following Clear It
Up feature discusses where some of these losses might come from, and the reasons why some firms go out of
business.
Why do firms cease to exist?
Can we say anything about what causes a firm to exit an industry? Profits are the measurement that determines
whether a business stays operating or not. Individuals start businesses with the purpose of making profits. They
invest their money, time, effort, and many other resources to produce and sell something that they hope will give
them something in return. Unfortunately, not all businesses are successful, and many new startups soon realize that
their “business venture” must eventually end.
In the model of perfectly competitive firms, those that consistently cannot make money will “exit,” which is a nice,
bloodless word for a more painful process. When a business fails, after all, workers lose their jobs, investors lose
their money, and owners and managers can lose their dreams. Many businesses fail. The U.S. Small Business
Administration indicates that in 2011, 534,907 new firms "entered," and 575,691 firms failed.
Sometimes a business fails because of poor management or workers who are not very productive, or because of
tough domestic or foreign competition. Businesses also fail from a variety of causes. For example, conditions of
demand and supply in the market may shift in an unexpected way, so that the prices that a business charges for
outputs fall or the prices for inputs rise. With millions of businesses in the U.S. economy, even a small fraction of
them failing will affect many people—and business failures can be very hard on the workers and managers directly
involved. However, from the standpoint of the overall economic system, business exits are sometimes a necessary
evil if a market-oriented system is going to offer a flexible mechanism for satisfying customers, keeping costs low,
and inventing new products.
How Entry and Exit Lead to Zero Profits in the Long Run
No perfectly competitive firm acting alone can affect the market price. However, the combination of many
firms entering or exiting the market will affect overall supply in the market. In turn, a shift in supply for the
market as a whole will affect the market price. Entry and exit to and from the market are the driving forces
behind a process that, in the long run, pushes the price down to minimum average total costs so that all firms
CLEAR IT UP
204
8 • Perfect Competition
Access for free at openstax.org

are earning a zero profit.
To understand how short-run profits for a perfectly competitive firm will evaporate in the long run, imagine
the following situation. The market is in long-run equilibrium, where all firms earn zero economic profits
producing the output level where P = MR = MC and P = AC. No firm has the incentive to enter or leave the
market. Let’s say that the product’s demand increases, and with that, the market price goes up. The existing
firms in the industry are now facing a higher price than before, so they will increase production to the new
output level where P = MR = MC.
This will temporarily make the market price rise above the minimum point on the average cost curve, and
therefore, the existing firms in the market will now be earning economic profits. However, these economic
profits attract other firms to enter the market. Entry of many new firms causes the market supply curve to shift
to the right. As the supply curve shifts to the right, the market price starts decreasing, and with that, economic
profits fall for new and existing firms. As long as there are still profits in the market, entry will continue to shift
supply to the right. This will stop whenever the market price is driven down to the zero-profit level, where no
firm is earning economic profits.
Short-run losses will fade away by reversing this process. Say that the market is in long-run equilibrium. This
time, instead, demand decreases, and with that, the market price starts falling. The existing firms in the
industry are now facing a lower price than before, and as it will be below the average cost curve, they will now
be making economic losses. Some firms will continue producing where the new P = MR = MC, as long as they
are able to cover their average variable costs. Some firms will have to shut down immediately as they will not
be able to cover their average variable costs, and will then only incur their fixed costs, minimizing their losses.
Exit of many firms causes the market supply curve to shift to the left. As the supply curve shifts to the left, the
market price starts rising, and economic losses start to be lower. This process ends whenever the market price
rises to the zero-profit level, where the existing firms are no longer losing money and are at zero profits again.
Thus, while a perfectly competitive firm can earn profits in the short run, in the long run the process of entry
will push down prices until they reach the zero-profit level. Conversely, while a perfectly competitive firm may
earn losses in the short run, firms will not continually lose money. In the long run, firms making losses are
able to escape from their fixed costs, and their exit from the market will push the price back up to the zero-
profit level. In the long run, this process of entry and exit will drive the price in perfectly competitive markets
to the zero-profit point at the bottom of the AC curve, where marginal cost crosses average cost.
The Long-Run Adjustment and Industry Types
Whenever there are expansions in an industry, costs of production for the existing and new firms could either
stay the same, increase, or even decrease. Therefore, we can categorize an industry as being (1) a constant-cost
industry (as demand increases, the cost of production for firms stays the same), (2) an increasing cost industry
(as demand increases, the cost of production for firms increases), or (3) a decreasing cost industry (as demand
increases the costs of production for the firms decreases).
For a constant-cost industry, whenever there is an increase in market demand and price, then the supply
curve shifts to the right with new firms’ entry and stops at the point where the new long-run equilibrium
intersects at the same market price as before. This is the case of constant returns to scale, which we discussed
earlier in the chapter on Production, Costs, and Industry Structure. However, why will costs remain the same?
In this type of industry, the supply curve is very elastic. Firms can easily supply any quantity that consumers
demand. In addition, there is a perfectly elastic supply of inputs—firms can easily increase their demand for
employees, for example, with no increase to wages. Tying in to our Bring it Home discussion, an increased
demand for ethanol in recent years has caused the demand for corn to increase. Consequently, many farmers
switched from growing wheat to growing corn. Agricultural markets are generally good examples of constant-
cost industries.
For an increasing cost industry, as the market expands, the old and new firms experience increases in their
8.3 • Entry and Exit Decisions in the Long Run
205

costs of production, which makes the new zero-profit level intersect at a higher price than before. Here
companies may have to deal with limited inputs, such as skilled labor. As the demand for these workers rises,
wages rise and this increases the cost of production for all firms. The industry supply curve in this type of
industry is more inelastic.
For a decreasing cost industry, as the market expands, the old and new firms experience lower costs of
production, which makes the new zero-profit level intersect at a lower price than before. In this case, the
industry and all the firms in it are experiencing falling average total costs. This can be due to an improvement
in technology in the entire industry or an increase in the education of employees. High-tech industries may be
a good example of a decreasing cost market.
Figure 8.8 (a) presents the case of an adjustment process in a constant-cost industry. Whenever there are
output expansions in this type of industry, the long-run outcome implies more output produced at exactly the
same original price. Note that supply was able to increase to meet the increased demand. When we join the
before and after long-run equilibriums, the resulting line is the long run supply (LRS) curve in perfectly
competitive markets. In this case, it is a flat curve. Figure 8.8 (b) and Figure 8.8 (c) present the cases for an
increasing cost and decreasing cost industry, respectively. For an increasing cost industry, the LRS is upward
sloping, while for a decreasing cost industry, the LRS is downward sloping.
FIGURE 8.8 Adjustment Process in a Constant-Cost Industry In (a), demand increased and supply met it. Notice
that the supply increase is equal to the demand increase. The result is that the equilibrium price stays the same as
quantity sold increases. In (b), notice that sellers were not able to increase supply as much as demand. Some inputs
were scarce, or wages were rising. The equilibrium price rises. In (c), sellers easily increased supply in response to
the demand increase. Here, new technology or economies of scale caused the large increase in supply, resulting in
declining equilibrium price.
8.4 Efficiency in Perfectly Competitive Markets
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
•
Apply concepts of productive efficiency and allocative efficiency to perfectly competitive markets
•
Compare the model of perfect competition to real-world markets
When profit-maximizing firms in perfectly competitive markets combine with utility-maximizing consumers,
something remarkable happens: the resulting quantities of outputs of goods and services demonstrate both
productive and allocative efficiency (terms that we first introduced in (Choice in a World of Scarcity) .
Productive efficiency means producing without waste, so that the choice is on the production possibility
frontier. In the long run in a perfectly competitive market, because of the process of entry and exit, the price in
the market is equal to the minimum of the long-run average cost curve. In other words, firms produce and sell
goods at the lowest possible average cost.
Allocative efficiency means that among the points on the production possibility frontier, the chosen point is
206
8 • Perfect Competition
Access for free at openstax.org

socially preferred—at least in a particular and specific sense. In a perfectly competitive market, price will be
equal to the marginal cost of production. Think about the price that one pays for a good as a measure of the
social benefit one receives for that good; after all, willingness to pay conveys what the good is worth to a buyer.
Then think about the marginal cost of producing the good as representing not just the cost for the firm, but
more broadly as the social cost of producing that good. When perfectly competitive firms follow the rule that
profits are maximized by producing at the quantity where price is equal to marginal cost, they are thus
ensuring that the social benefits they receive from producing a good are in line with the social costs of
production.
To explore what economists mean by allocative efficiency, it is useful to walk through an example. Begin by
assuming that the market for wholesale flowers is perfectly competitive, and so P = MC. Now, consider what it
would mean if firms in that market produced a lesser quantity of flowers. At a lesser quantity, marginal costs
will not yet have increased as much, so that price will exceed marginal cost; that is, P > MC. In that situation,
the benefit to society as a whole of producing additional goods, as measured by the willingness of consumers
to pay for marginal units of a good, would be higher than the cost of the inputs of labor and physical capital
needed to produce the marginal good. In other words, the gains to society as a whole from producing
additional marginal units will be greater than the costs.
Conversely, consider what it would mean if, compared to the level of output at the allocatively efficient choice
when P = MC, firms produced a greater quantity of flowers. At a greater quantity, marginal costs of production
will have increased so that P < MC. In that case, the marginal costs of producing additional flowers is greater
than the benefit to society as measured by what people are willing to pay. For society as a whole, since the costs
are outstripping the benefits, it will make sense to produce a lower quantity of such goods.
When perfectly competitive firms maximize their profits by producing the quantity where P = MC, they also
assure that the benefits to consumers of what they are buying, as measured by the price they are willing to pay,
is equal to the costs to society of producing the marginal units, as measured by the marginal costs the firm
must pay—and thus that allocative efficiency holds.
We should view the statements that a perfectly competitive market in the long run will feature both productive
and allocative efficiency with a degree of skepticism about its truth. Remember, economists are using the
concept of “efficiency” in a particular and specific sense, not as a synonym for “desirable in every way.” For
one thing, consumers’ ability to pay reflects the income distribution in a particular society. For example, a
person with a low income may not be able to purchase their own car because they have insufficient income.
Perfect competition, in the long run, is a hypothetical benchmark. For market structures such as monopoly,
monopolistic competition, and oligopoly, which are more frequently observed in the real world than perfect
competition, firms will not always produce at the minimum of average cost, nor will they always set price equal
to marginal cost. Thus, these other competitive situations will not produce productive and allocative efficiency.
Moreover, real-world markets include many issues that are assumed away in the model of perfect competition,
including pollution, inventions of new technology, poverty which may make some people unable to pay for
basic necessities of life, government programs like national defense or education, discrimination in labor
markets, and buyers and sellers who must deal with imperfect and unclear information. We explore these
issues in other chapters. However, the theoretical efficiency of perfect competition does provide a useful
benchmark for comparing the issues that arise from these real-world problems.
A Dime a Dozen
A quick glance at Table 8.12 reveals the dramatic increase in North Dakota corn production—almost a tenfold
increase since 1972. Recent allocation of land to corn (as of mid-2019) is estimated to have increased to more than
BRING IT HOME
8.4 • Efficiency in Perfectly Competitive Markets
207

4 million acres. Taking into consideration that corn typically yields two to three times as many bushels per acre as
wheat, it is obvious there has been a significant increase in bushels of corn. Why the increase in corn acreage?
Converging prices.
Year
Corn (millions of acres)
1972
495,000
2013
3,850,000
TABLE 8.12 (Source: USDA
National Agricultural Statistics
Service)
Historically, wheat prices have been higher than corn prices, offsetting wheat’s lower yield per acre. However, in
recent years wheat and corn prices have been converging. In April 2013, Agweek reported the gap was just 71 cents
per bushel. As the difference in price narrowed, switching to the production of higher yield per acre of corn simply
made good business sense. Erik Younggren, president of the National Association of Wheat Growers said in the
Agweek article, “I don't think we're going to see mile after mile of waving amber fields [of wheat] anymore." (Until
wheat prices rise, we will probably be seeing field after field of tasseled corn.)
208
8 • Perfect Competition
Access for free at openstax.org

Key Terms
break even point level of output where the marginal cost curve intersects the average cost curve at the
minimum point of AC; if the price is at this point, the firm is earning zero economic profits
entry the long-run process of firms entering an industry in response to industry profits
exit the long-run process of firms reducing production and shutting down in response to industry losses
long-run equilibrium where all firms earn zero economic profits producing the output level where P = MR =
MC and P = AC
marginal revenue the additional revenue gained from selling one more unit
market structure the conditions in an industry, such as number of sellers, how easy or difficult it is for a new
firm to enter, and the type of products that are sold
perfect competition each firm faces many competitors that sell identical products
price taker a firm in a perfectly competitive market that must take the prevailing market price as given
shutdown point level of output where the marginal cost curve intersects the average variable cost curve at the
minimum point of AVC; if the price is below this point, the firm should shut down immediately
Key Concepts and Summary
8.1 Perfect Competition and Why It Matters
A perfectly competitive firm is a price taker, which means that it must accept the equilibrium price at which it
sells goods. If a perfectly competitive firm attempts to charge even a tiny amount more than the market price,
it will be unable to make any sales. In a perfectly competitive market there are thousands of sellers, easy entry,
and identical products. A short-run production period is when firms are producing with some fixed inputs.
Long-run equilibrium in a perfectly competitive industry occurs after all firms have entered and exited the
industry and seller profits are driven to zero.
Perfect competition means that there are many sellers, there is easy entry and exiting of firms, products are
identical from one seller to another, and sellers are price takers.
8.2 How Perfectly Competitive Firms Make Output Decisions
As a perfectly competitive firm produces a greater quantity of output, its total revenue steadily increases at a
constant rate determined by the given market price. Profits will be highest (or losses will be smallest) at the
quantity of output where total revenues exceed total costs by the greatest amount (or where total revenues fall
short of total costs by the smallest amount). Alternatively, profits will be highest where marginal revenue,
which is price for a perfectly competitive firm, is equal to marginal cost. If the market price faced by a perfectly
competitive firm is above average cost at the profit-maximizing quantity of output, then the firm is making
profits. If the market price is below average cost at the profit-maximizing quantity of output, then the firm is
making losses.
If the market price is equal to average cost at the profit-maximizing level of output, then the firm is making
zero profits. We call the point where the marginal cost curve crosses the average cost curve, at the minimum of
the average cost curve, the “zero profit point.” If the market price that a perfectly competitive firm faces is
below average variable cost at the profit-maximizing quantity of output, then the firm should shut down
operations immediately. If the market price that a perfectly competitive firm faces is above average variable
cost, but below average cost, then the firm should continue producing in the short run, but exit in the long run.
We call the point where the marginal cost curve crosses the average variable cost curve the shutdown point.
8.3 Entry and Exit Decisions in the Long Run
In the long run, firms will respond to profits through a process of entry, where existing firms expand output
and new firms enter the market. Conversely, firms will react to losses in the long run through a process of exit,
in which existing firms cease production altogether. Through the process of entry in response to profits and
exit in response to losses, the price level in a perfectly competitive market will move toward the zero-profit
8 • Key Terms
209

point, where the marginal cost curve crosses the AC curve at the minimum of the average cost curve.
The long-run supply curve shows the long-run output supplied by firms in three different types of industries:
constant cost, increasing cost, and decreasing cost.
8.4 Efficiency in Perfectly Competitive Markets
Long-run equilibrium in perfectly competitive markets meets two important conditions: allocative efficiency
and productive efficiency. These two conditions have important implications. First, resources are allocated to
their best alternative use. Second, they provide the maximum satisfaction attainable by society.
Self-Check Questions
1. Firms in a perfectly competitive market are said to be “price takers”—that is, once the market determines
an equilibrium price for the product, firms must accept this price. If you sell a product in a perfectly
competitive market, but you are not happy with its price, would you raise the price, even by a cent?
2. Would independent trucking fit the characteristics of a perfectly competitive industry?
3. Look at Table 8.13. What would happen to the firm’s profits if the market price increases to $6 per pack of
raspberries?
Quantity
Total Cost
Fixed Cost
Variable Cost
Total Revenue
Profit
0
$62
$62
-
$0
−$62
10
$90
$62
$28
$60
−$30
20
$110
$62
$48
$120
$10
30
$126
$62
$64
$180
$54
40
$144
$62
$82
$240
$96
50
$166
$62
$104
$300
$134
60
$192
$62
$130
$360
$168
70
$224
$62
$162
$420
$196
80
$264
$62
$202
$480
$216
90
$324
$62
$262
$540
$216
100
$404
$62
$342
$600
$196
TABLE 8.13
210
8 • Self-Check Questions
Access for free at openstax.org

4. Suppose that the market price increases to $6, as Table 8.14 shows. What would happen to the profit-
maximizing output level?
Quantity
Total Cost
Fixed Cost
Variable Cost
Marginal Cost
Total Revenue
Marginal Revenue
0
$62
$62
-
-
$0
-
10
$90
$62
$28
$2.80
$60
$6.00
20
$110
$62
$48
$2.00
$120
$6.00
30
$126
$62
$64
$1.60
$180
$6.00
40
$144
$62
$82
$1.80
$240
$6.00
50
$166
$62
$104
$2.20
$300
$6.00
60
$192
$62
$130
$2.60
$360
$6.00
70
$224
$62
$162
$3.20
$420
$6.00
80
$264
$62
$202
$4.00
$480
$6.00
90
$324
$62
$262
$6.00
$540
$6.00
100
$404
$62
$342
$8.00
$600
$6.00
TABLE 8.14
5. Explain in words why a profit-maximizing firm will not choose to produce at a quantity where marginal
cost exceeds marginal revenue.
6. A firm’s marginal cost curve above the average variable cost curve is equal to the firm’s individual supply
curve. This means that every time a firm receives a price from the market it will be willing to supply the
amount of output where the price equals marginal cost. What happens to the firm’s individual supply
curve if marginal costs increase?
7. If new technology in a perfectly competitive market brings about a substantial reduction in costs of
production, how will this affect the market?
8. A market in perfect competition is in long-run equilibrium. What happens to the market if labor unions
are able to increase wages for workers?
9. Productive efficiency and allocative efficiency are two concepts achieved in the long run in a perfectly
competitive market. These are the two reasons why we call them “perfect.” How would you use these two
concepts to analyze other market structures and label them “imperfect?”
10. Explain how the profit-maximizing rule of setting P = MC leads a perfectly competitive market to be
allocatively efficient.
Review Questions
11. A single firm in a perfectly competitive market is relatively small compared to the rest of the market. What
does this mean? How “small” is “small”?
12. What are the four basic assumptions of perfect competition? Explain in words what they imply for a
perfectly competitive firm.
8 • Review Questions
211

13. What is a “price taker” firm?
14. How does a perfectly competitive firm decide what price to charge?
15. What prevents a perfectly competitive firm from seeking higher profits by increasing the price that it
charges?
16. How does a perfectly competitive firm calculate total revenue?
17. Briefly explain the reason for the shape of a marginal revenue curve for a perfectly competitive firm.
18. What two rules does a perfectly competitive firm apply to determine its profit-maximizing quantity of
output?
19. How does the average cost curve help to show whether a firm is making profits or losses?
20. What two lines on a cost curve diagram intersect at the zero-profit point?
21. Should a firm shut down immediately if it is making losses?
22. How does the average variable cost curve help a firm know whether it should shut down immediately?
23. What two lines on a cost curve diagram intersect at the shutdown point?
24. Why does entry occur?
25. Why does exit occur?
26. Do entry and exit occur in the short run, the long run, both, or neither?
27. What price will a perfectly competitive firm end up charging in the long run? Why?
28. Will a perfectly competitive market display productive efficiency? Why or why not?
29. Will a perfectly competitive market display allocative efficiency? Why or why not?
Critical Thinking Questions
30. Finding a life partner is a complicated process that may take many years. It is hard to think of this process
as being part of a very complex market, with a demand and a supply for partners. Think about how this
market works and some of its characteristics, such as search costs. Would you consider it a perfectly
competitive market?
31. Can you name five examples of perfectly competitive markets? Why or why not?
32. Your company operates in a perfectly competitive market. You have been told that advertising can help
you increase your sales in the short run. Would you create an aggressive advertising campaign for your
product?
33. Since a perfectly competitive firm can sell as much as it wishes at the market price, why can the firm not
simply increase its profits by selling an extremely high quantity?
34. Many firms in the United States file for bankruptcy every year, yet they still continue operating. Why would
they do this instead of completely shutting down?
35. Why will profits for firms in a perfectly competitive industry tend to vanish in the long run?
36. Why will losses for firms in a perfectly competitive industry tend to vanish in the long run?
37. Assuming that the market for cigarettes is in perfect competition, what does allocative and productive
efficiency imply in this case? What does it not imply?
212
8 • Critical Thinking Questions
Access for free at openstax.org

38. In the argument for why perfect competition is allocatively efficient, the price that people are willing to
pay represents the gains to society and the marginal cost to the firm represents the costs to society. Can
you think of some social costs or issues that are not included in the marginal cost to the firm? Or some
social gains that are not included in what people pay for a good?
Problems
39. The AAA Aquarium Co. sells aquariums for $20 each. Fixed costs of production are $20. The total variable
costs are $20 for one aquarium, $25 for two units, $35 for the three units, $50 for four units, and $80 for
five units. In the form of a table, calculate total revenue, marginal revenue, total cost, and marginal cost for
each output level (one to five units). What is the profit-maximizing quantity of output? On one diagram,
sketch the total revenue and total cost curves. On another diagram, sketch the marginal revenue and
marginal cost curves.
40. Perfectly competitive firm Doggies Paradise Inc. sells winter coats for dogs. Dog coats sell for $72 each.
The fixed costs of production are $100. The total variable costs are $64 for one unit, $84 for two units,
$114 for three units, $184 for four units, and $270 for five units. In the form of a table, calculate total
revenue, marginal revenue, total cost and marginal cost for each output level (one to five units). On one
diagram, sketch the total revenue and total cost curves. On another diagram, sketch the marginal revenue
and marginal cost curves. What is the profit maximizing quantity?
41. A computer company produces affordable, easy-to-use home computer systems and has fixed costs of
$250. The marginal cost of producing computers is $700 for the first computer, $250 for the second, $300
for the third, $350 for the fourth, $400 for the fifth, $450 for the sixth, and $500 for the seventh.
a.
Create a table that shows the company’s output, total cost, marginal cost, average cost, variable cost,
and average variable cost.
b.
At what price is the zero-profit point? At what price is the shutdown point?
c.
If the company sells the computers for $500, is it making a profit or a loss? How big is the profit or
loss? Sketch a graph with AC, MC, and AVC curves to illustrate your answer and show the profit or loss.
d.
If the firm sells the computers for $300, is it making a profit or a loss? How big is the profit or loss?
Sketch a graph with AC, MC, and AVC curves to illustrate your answer and show the profit or loss.
8 • Problems
213

214
8 • Problems
Access for free at openstax.org

FIGURE 9.1 Political Power from a Cotton Monopoly In the mid-nineteenth century, the United States, specifically
the Southern states, had a near monopoly in the cotton that they supplied to Great Britain. These states attempted
to leverage this economic power into political power—trying to sway Great Britain to formally recognize the
Confederate States of America. (Credit: modification of "cotton!" by ashley/Flickr, CC BY 2.0)
CHAPTER OBJECTIVES
In this chapter, you will learn about:
•
How Monopolies form: Barriers to Entry
•
How a Profit-Maximizing Monopoly Chooses Output and Price
Introduction to a Monopoly
The Rest is History
Many of the opening case studies have focused on current events. This one steps into the past to observe how
monopoly, or near monopolies, have helped shape history. In spring 1773, the East India Company, a firm that, in its
time, was designated “too big to fail,” was experiencing financial difficulties. To help shore up the failing firm, the
British Parliament authorized the Tea Act. The act continued the tax on teas and made the East India Company the
sole legal supplier of tea to the American colonies. By November, the citizens of Boston had had enough. They
refused to permit the unloading of tea, citing their main complaint: “No taxation without representation.” Several
newspapers, including The Massachusetts Gazette, warned arriving tea-bearing ships, “We are prepared, and shall
not fail to pay them an unwelcome visit by The Mohawks.”
9
Monopoly
BRING IT HOME

Step forward in time to 1860—the eve of the American Civil War—to another near monopoly supplier of historical
significance: the U.S. cotton industry. At that time, the Southern states provided the majority of the cotton Britain
imported. The South, wanting to secede from the Union, hoped to leverage Britain’s high dependency on its cotton
into formal diplomatic recognition of the Confederate States of America.
This leads us to this chapter's topic: a firm that controls all (or nearly all) of the supply of a good or service—a
monopoly. How do monopoly firms behave in the marketplace? Do they have “power?” Does this power potentially
have unintended consequences? We’ll return to this case at the end of the chapter to see how the tea and cotton
monopolies influenced U.S. history.
Many believe that top executives at firms are the strongest supporters of market competition, but this belief is
far from the truth. Think about it this way: If you very much wanted to win an Olympic gold medal, would you
rather be far better than everyone else, or locked in competition with many athletes just as good as you?
Similarly, if you would like to attain a very high level of profits, would you rather manage a business with little
or no competition, or struggle against many tough competitors who are trying to sell to your customers? By
now, you might have read the chapter on Perfect Competition. In this chapter, we explore the opposite extreme:
monopoly.
If perfect competition is a market where firms have no market power and they simply respond to the market
price, monopoly is a market with no competition at all, and firms have a great deal of market power. In the case
of monopoly, one firm produces all of the output in a market. Since a monopoly faces no significant
competition, it can charge any price it wishes, subject to the demand curve. While a monopoly, by definition,
refers to a single firm, in practice people often use the term to describe a market in which one firm merely has
a very high market share. This tends to be the definition that the U.S. Department of Justice uses.
Even though there are very few true monopolies in existence, we do deal with some of those few every day,
often without realizing it: The U.S. Postal Service, your electric, and garbage collection companies are a few
examples. Some new drugs are produced by only one pharmaceutical firm—and no close substitutes for that
drug may exist.
From the mid-1990s until 2004, the U.S. Department of Justice prosecuted the Microsoft Corporation for
including Internet Explorer as the default web browser with its operating system. The Justice Department’s
argument was that, since Microsoft possessed an extremely high market share in the industry for operating
systems, the inclusion of a free web browser constituted unfair competition to other browsers, such as
Netscape Navigator. Since nearly everyone was using Windows, including Internet Explorer eliminated the
incentive for consumers to explore other browsers and made it impossible for competitors to gain a foothold in
the market. In 2013, the Windows system ran on more than 90% of the most commonly sold personal
computers. In 2015, a U.S. federal court tossed out antitrust charges that Google had an agreement with mobile
device makers to set Google as the default search engine.
This chapter begins by describing how monopolies are protected from competition, including laws that
prohibit competition, technological advantages, and certain configurations of demand and supply. It then
discusses how a monopoly will choose its profit-maximizing quantity to produce and what price to charge.
While a monopoly must be concerned about whether consumers will purchase its products or spend their
money on something altogether different, the monopolist need not worry about the actions of other competing
firms producing its products. As a result, a monopoly is not a price taker like a perfectly competitive firm, but
instead exercises some power to choose its market price.
216
9 • Monopoly
Access for free at openstax.org

9.1 How Monopolies Form: Barriers to Entry
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
•
Distinguish between a natural monopoly and a legal monopoly.
•
Explain how economies of scale and the control of natural resources led to the necessary formation of legal
monopolies
•
Analyze the importance of trademarks and patents in promoting innovation
•
Identify examples of predatory pricing
Because of the lack of competition, monopolies tend to earn significant economic profits. These profits should
attract vigorous competition as we described in Perfect Competition, and yet, because of one particular
characteristic of monopoly, they do not. Barriers to entry are the legal, technological, or market forces that
discourage or prevent potential competitors from entering a market. Barriers to entry can range from the
simple and easily surmountable, such as the cost of renting retail space, to the extremely restrictive. For
example, there are a finite number of radio frequencies available for broadcasting. Once an entrepreneur or
firm has purchased the rights to all of them, no new competitors can enter the market.
In some cases, barriers to entry may lead to monopoly. In other cases, they may limit competition to a few
firms. Barriers may block entry even if the firm or firms currently in the market are earning profits. Thus, in
markets with significant barriers to entry, it is not necessarily true that abnormally high profits will attract new
firms, and that this entry of new firms will eventually cause the price to decline so that surviving firms earn
only a normal level of profit in the long run.
There are five types of monopoly, based on the types of barriers to entry they exploit.
Natural Monopoly
Economies of scale can combine with the size of the market to limit competition. (We introduced this theme in
Production, Cost and Industry Structure). Figure 9.2 presents a long-run average cost curve for the airplane
manufacturing industry. It shows economies of scale up to an output of 8,000 planes per year and a price of P0,
then constant returns to scale from 8,000 to 20,000 planes per year, and diseconomies of scale at a quantity of
production greater than 20,000 planes per year.
Now consider the market demand curve in the diagram, which intersects the long-run average cost (LRAC)
curve at an output level of 5,000 planes per year and at a price P1, which is higher than P0. In this situation, the
market has room for only one producer. If a second firm attempts to enter the market at a smaller size, say by
producing a quantity of 4,000 planes, then its average costs will be higher than those of the existing firm, and it
will be unable to compete. If the second firm attempts to enter the market at a larger size, like 8,000 planes per
year, then it could produce at a lower average cost—but it could not sell all 8,000 planes that it produced
because of insufficient demand in the market.
9.1 • How Monopolies Form: Barriers to Entry
217

FIGURE 9.2 Economies of Scale and Natural Monopoly In this market, the demand curve intersects the long-run
average cost (LRAC) curve at its downward-sloping part. A natural monopoly occurs when the quantity demanded is
less than the minimum quantity it takes to be at the bottom of the long-run average cost curve.
Economists call this situation, when economies of scale are large relative to the quantity demanded in the
market, a natural monopoly. Natural monopolies often arise in industries where the marginal cost of adding an
additional customer is very low, once the fixed costs of the overall system are in place. This results in situations
where there are substantial economies of scale. For example, once a water company lays the main water pipes
through a neighborhood, the marginal cost of providing water service to another home is fairly low. Once the
electric company installs lines in a new subdivision, the marginal cost of providing additional electrical service
to one more home is minimal. It would be costly and duplicative for a second water company to enter the
market and invest in a whole second set of main water pipes, or for a second electricity company to enter the
market and invest in a whole new set of electrical wires. These industries offer an example where, because of
economies of scale, one producer can serve the entire market more efficiently than a number of smaller
producers that would need to make duplicate physical capital investments.
A natural monopoly can also arise in smaller local markets for products that are difficult to transport. For
example, cement production exhibits economies of scale, and the quantity of cement demanded in a local area
may not be much larger than what a single plant can produce. Moreover, the costs of transporting cement over
land are high, and so a cement plant in an area without access to water transportation may be a natural
monopoly.
Control of a Physical Resource
Another type of monopoly occurs when a company has control of a scarce physical resource. In the U.S.
economy, one historical example of this pattern occurred when ALCOA—the Aluminum Company of
America—controlled most of the supply of bauxite, a key mineral used in making aluminum. Back in the
1930s, when ALCOA controlled most of the bauxite, other firms were simply unable to produce enough
aluminum to compete.
As another example, the majority of global diamond production is controlled by DeBeers, a multi-national
company that has mining and production operations in South Africa, Botswana, Namibia, and Canada. It also
has exploration activities on four continents, while directing a worldwide distribution network of rough cut
diamonds. Although in recent years they have experienced growing competition, their impact on the rough
218
9 • Monopoly
Access for free at openstax.org